I do not doubt but the Title of our book of Occult Philosophy, or of Magick, may by the rarity of it allure many to read it, amongst which, some of a crasie  judgement, and some that are perverse will come to hear what I can say, who, by their rash ignorance may take the name of Magick in the worse sense, and though scarce having seen the title, cry out that I teach forbidden Arts, sow the seed of Heresies, offend pious ears, and scandalize excellent wits; that I am a sorcerer, and superstitious and divellish, who indeed am a Magician: to whom I answer, that a Magician doth not amongst learned men signifie a sorcerer, or one that is superstitious or divellish; but a wise man, a priest, a prophet; and that the Sybils were Magicianesses, & therefore prophecyed most cleerly of Christ; and that Magicians, as wise men, by the wonderful secrets of the world, knew Christ, the author of the world, to be born, and came first of all to worship him; and that the name of Magicke was received by Phylosophers, commended by Divines, and not unacceptable to the Gospel. I believe that the supercilious censors will object against the Sybils, holy Magicians and the Gospel it self sooner then receive the name of Magick into favor; so conscientious are they, that neither Apollo, nor all the Muses, nor an Angel from Heaven can redeem me from their curse. Whom therefore I advise, that they read not our Writings, nor understand them, nor remember them. For they are pernicious, and full of poyson; the gate of Acheron is in this book; it speaks stones, let them take heed that it beat not out their brains. But you that come without prejudice to read it, if you have so much discretion of prudence, as Bees have in gathering honey, read securely, and believe that you shall receive no little profit, and much pleasure; but if you shall find any things that may not please you, let them alone and make no use of them, for I do not approve of them, but declare them to you; but do not refuse other things, for they that look into the books of Physicians, do together with antidotes and medicines, read also poysons. I confess that Magick it self teacheth many superfluous things, and curious prodigies for ostentation; leave them as empty things, yet be not ignorant of their causes. But those things which are for the profit of man, for the turning away of evil events, for the destroying of sorceries, for the curing of diseases, for the exterminating of phantasmes, for the preserving of life, honor, or fortune, may be done without offense to God, or injury to Religion, because they are, as profitable, so necessary. But I have admonished you, that I have writ many things, rather narratively then affirmatively; for so it seemed needful that we should pass over fewer things following the judgments of Platonists, and other Gentile Philosophers when they did suggest an argument of writing to our purpose; therefore if any error have been committed, or any thing hath been spoken more freely, pardon my youth; for I wrote this being scarce a yong  man, that I may excuse my self, and say, "whilest I was a child, I spake as a childe, and I understood as a child, but being become a man, I retracted those things which I did being a boy, and in my book of the vanity and uncertainty of Sciences I did for the most part retract this book." But here haply you may blame me again, saying, "Behold thou being a youth didst write, and now being old hast retracted it; what therefore hast thou set forth?" I confess whilst I was very yong, I set upon the writing of these books, but, hoping that I should set them forth with corrections and enlargements, and for that cause I gave them to Tritemius  a Neapolitanian Abbot, formerly a Spanhemensian, a man very industrious after secret things. But it happened afterwards, that the work being intercepted, before I finished it, it was carryed about imperfect, and impolished, and did fly abroad in Italy, in France, in Germany through many mens hands, and some men, whether more impatiently, or imprudently, I know not, would have put it thus imperfect to the press, with which mischeif, I being affected, determined to set it forth my self, thinking that there might be less danger if these books came out of my hands with some amendments, than to come forth torn, and in fragments out of other mens hands. Moreover, I thought it no crime if I should not suffer the testimony of my youth to perish. Also we have added some Chapters, and we inserted many things, which did seem unfit to pass by, which the curious Reader shall be able to understand by the inequality of the very phrase; for we were unwilling to begin the work anew, and to unravell all that we had done, but to correct it, and put some flourish upon it. Wherefore now I pray thee, Curteous  Reader, again, weigh not these things according to the present time of setting them forth, but pardon my curious youth, if thou shalt findd any thing in them that may displease thee.
When I was of late (most reverend Father) for a while conversant with you in your Monastery of Herbipolis, we conferred together of divers things concerning Chymistry, Magick, and Cabalie, and of other things, which as yet lye  hid in Secret Sciences, and Arts; and then there was one great question amongst the rest, why Magick, whereas it was accounted by all ancient Philosophers the chiefest Science, & by the ancient wise men, & Priests was always held an great veneration, came at last after the beginning of the Catholike  Church to be alwaies odious to, and suspected by the holy Fathers, and then exploded by Divines, and condemned by sacred Canons, and moreover by all laws, and ordinances forbidden. Now the cause, as I conceive is no other then this, viz because by a certain fatall depravation of times, and men, many false Philosophers crept in, and these under the name of Magicians, heaping together through various sorts of errors and factions of false Religions, many cursed superstitions and dangerous Rites, and many wicked Sacrileges, out of Orthodox Religion, even to the perfection of nature, and destruction of men, and injury of God, set forth very many wicked, and unlawfull books, such as we see carryed about in these dayes, to which they have by stealth prefixed the most honest name, and title of Magick. They therefore by this sacred title of Magick, hoped to gain credit to their cursed and detestable fooleries. 
Hence those things, which Lucan relates of Thessala the Magicianess, and Homer of the omnipotency of Circe, whereof many I confess are as well of a fallacious opinion, as a superstitious diligence, &d pernicious labor, as when they cannot come under a wicked Art, yet they presume they may be able to cloak themselves under that venerable title of Magick. Since then these things are so, I wondered much, and was not less angry, that as yet there hath been no man, who did challenge this sublime and sacred discipline with the crime of impiety, or had delivered it purely and sincerely to us, since I have seen of our modern writers Roger Bacon, Robert  an English man, Peter Apponus, Albertus  the Teutonich, Arnoldas de villa Nova, Anselme the Parmensian, Picatrix the Spaniard, Cicclus Asculus of Florence, and many others, but writers of an obscure name, when they promised to treat of Magick, do nothing but irrationall toies, and superstitions unworthy of honest men. Hence my spirit was moved, and by reason partly of admiration, and partly of indignation, I was willing to play the Philosopher, supposing that I should do no discommendable work, who have been always from my youth a curious, and undaunted searcher for wonderfull effects, and operations full of mysteries; if I should recover that ancient Magick the discipline of all wise men from the errors of impiety, purifie  and adorn it with its proper lustre, and vindicate it from the injuries of calumniators; which thing, though I long deliberated of it in my mind, yet never durst as yet undertake, but after some conference betwixt us of these things at Herbipolis, your transcending knowledge, and learning, and your ardent adhortation put courage, and boldness into me. There selecting the opinions of Philosophers of known credit, and purging the introduction of the wicked (who dissemblingly, with a counterfeited knowledge did teach, that traditions of Magicians must be learned from very reprobate books of darkness, as from institutions of wonderfull operations) and removing all darkness, have at last composed three compendious books of Magick, and titled them Of Occult Philosophy, being a title less offensive, which books I submit (you excelling in the knowledge of these things) to your correction and censure, that if I have wrote any thing which may tend either to the contumely of nature, offending God, or injury of Religion, you may condemn the error; but if the scandal of impiety be dissolved and purged, you may defend the tradition of truth; and that you would do so with these books, and Magick it self, that nothing may be concealed which may be profitable, and nothing approved of which cannot but do hurt, by which means these three books having passed your examination with approbation, may at length be thought worthy to come forth with good success in publike, and may not be afraid to come under the censure of posterity.
Seeing there is a three-fold World, Elementary, Celestiall, and Intellectual, and every inferior is governed by its superior, and receiveth the influence of the vertues thereof, so that the very original, and chief Worker of all doth by Angels, the Heavens, Stars, Elements, Animals, Plants, Metals, and Stones convey from himself the vertues of his Omnipotency upon us, for whose service he made, and created all these things: Wise men conceive it no way irrationall that it should be possible for us to ascend by the same degrees through each World, to the same very originall World it self, the Maker of all things, and first Cause, from whence all things are, and proceed; and also to enjoy not only these vertues, which are already in the more excellent kind of things, but also besides these, to draw new vertues from above. Hence it is that they seek after the vertues of the Elementary world, through the help of Physick, and Naturall Philosophy in the various mixtions of Naturall things, then of the Celestiall world in the Rayes, and influences thereof, according to the rules of Astrologers, and the doctrines of Mathematicians, joyning the Celestiall vertues to the former: Moreover, they ratifie and confirm all these with the powers of divers Intelligencies, through the sacred Ceremonies of Religions. The order and process of all these I shall endeavor to deliver in these three Books: Whereof the forst contains naturall Magick, the second Celestiall, and the third Ceremoniall. But I know not whether it be an unpardonable presumption in me, that I, a man of so little judgement and learning, should in my very youth so confidently set upon a business so difficult, so hard, and intricate as this is. Wherefore, whatsoever things have here already, and shall afterward be said by me, I would not have any one assent to them, nor shall I my self, any further then they shall be approved of by the Universall Church, and the Congregation of the Faithfull.
Magick is a faculty of wonderfull vertue, full of most high mysteries, containing the most profound Contemplation of most secret things, together with the nature, power, quality, substance, and vertues thereof, as also the knowledge of whole nature, and it doth instruct us concerning the differing, and agreement of things amongst themselves, whence it produceth its wonderfull effects, by uniting the vertues of things through the application of them one to the other, and to their inferior sutable subjects, joyning and knitting them together thoroughly by the powers, and vertues of the superior Bodies. This is the most perfect and chief Science, that sacred and sublimer kind of Phylosophy, and lastly the most absolute perfection of all most excellent Philosophy. For seeing that all regulative Philosophy is divided into Naturall, Mathematicall, and Theologicall: (Naturall Philosophy teacheth the nature of those things which are in the world, searching and enquiring into their Causes, Effects, Times, Places, Fashions, Events, their Whole, and Parts, also
All these things doth naturall Philosophy, the viewer of nature contain, teaching us according to Virgils Muse.
But Mathematicall Philosophy teacheth us to know the quantity of naturall Bodies, as extended into three dimensions, as also to conceive of the motion, and course of Celestiall Bodies.
Now Theologicall Philosophy, or Divinity, teacheth what God is, what the Mind, what an Intelligence, what an Angel, what a Divell, what the Soul, what Religion, what sacred Institutions, Rites, Temples, Observations, and sacred Mysteries are: It instructs us also concerning Faith, Miracles, the vertues of Words and Figures, the secret operations and mysteries of Seals, and as Apuleius saith, it teacheth us rightly to understand, and to be skilled in the Ceremoniall Laws, the equity of Holy things and rule of Religions. But to recollect my self) these three principall faculties Magick comprehends, unites, and actuates; deservedly therefore was it by the Ancients esteemed as the highest, and most sacred Philosophy. It was, as we find, brought to light by most sage Authours, and most famous Writers; amongst which principally Zamolxis and Zoroaster were so famous, that many believed they were the inventors of this Science. Their track  Abbaris the Hyperborean, Charmondas, Damigeron, Eudoxus, Hermippus followed: there were also other eminent, choice men, as Mercurius Tresmegistus, Porphyrius, Iamblicus, Plotinus, Proclus, Dardanus, Orpheus the Thracian, Gog the Grecian, Germa the Babilonian, Apollonius of Tyana, Osthanes also wrote excellently in this Art; whose Books being as it were lost, Democritus of Abdera recovered, and set forth with his own Commentaries. Besides Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, Plato, and many other renowned Philosophers travelled far by Sea to learn this Art: and being returned, published it with wonderfull devoutness, esteeming of it as a great secret. Also it is well known that Pythagoras, and Plato went to the Prophets of Memphis to learn it, and travelled through almost all Syria, Egypt, Judea, and the Schools of the Caldeans, that they might not be ignorant of the most sacred Memorials, and Records of Magick, as also that they might be furnished with Divine things. Whosoever therefore is desirous to study in this Faculty, if he be not skilled in naturall Philosophy, wherein are discovered the qualities of things, and in which are found the occult properties of every Being, and if he be not skilful in the Mathematicks, and in the Aspects, and Figures of the Stars, upon which depends the sublime vertue, and property of every thing; and if he be not learned in Theologie, wherein are manifested those immateriall substances, which dispence, and minister all things, he cannot be possibly able to understand the rationality of Magick. For there is no work that is done by meer Magick, nor any work that is meerly Magicall, that doth not comprehend these three Faculties.
There are four Elements, and originall grounds of all corporeall things, Fire, Earth, Water, Aire, of which all elementated inferiour bodies are compounded; not by way of heaping them up together, but by transmutation, and union; and when they are destroyed, they are resolved into Elements. For there is none of the sensible Elements that is pure, but they are more or less mixed, and apt to be changed one into the other: Even as Earth becoming dirty, and being dissolved, becomes Water, and the same being made thick and hard, becometh Earth again; but being evaporated through heat, passeth into Aire, and that being kindled, passeth into Fire, and this being extinguished, returns back again into Aire, but being cooled again after its burning, becometh Earth, or Stone, or Sulphur, and this is manifested by Lightening: Plato also was of that opinion, that Earth was wholly changeable, and that the rest of the Elements are changed, as into this, so into one another successively. But it is the opinion of the subtiller sort of Philosophers, that Earth is not changed, but relented and mixed with other Elements, which do dissolve it, and that it returns back into it self again. Now, every one of the Elements hath two specificall qualities, the former whereof it retains as proper to it self, in the other, as a mean, it agrees with that which comes next after it. For Fire is hot and dry, the Earth dry and cold, the Water cold and moist, the Aire moist and ot. And so after this manner the Elements, according to two contrary qualities, are contrary one to the other, as Fire to Water, and Earth to Aire. Moreover, the Elements are upon another account opposite one to the other: For some are heavy, as Earth and Water, and others are light, as Aire and Fire. Wherefore the Stoicks called the former passives, but the latter actives. And yet once again Plato distinguished them after another manner, and assigns to every one of them three qualities, viz to the Fire brightness, thinness and motion, but to the Earth darkness, thickness and quietness. And according to these qualities the Elements of Fire and Earth are contrary. But the other Elements borrow their qualities from these, so that the Aire receives two qualities of the Fire, thinness and motion; and one of the Earth, viz darkness. In like manner Water receives two qualities of the Earth, darkness and thickness, and one of Fire, viz motion. But Fire is twice more thin then Aire, thrice more movable, and four times more bright: and the Aire is twice more bright, thrice more thin, and four times more moveable then Water. Wherefore Water is twice more bright then Earth, thrice more thin, and four times more movable. As therefore the Fire is to the Aire, so Aire is to the Water, and Water to the Earth; and again, as the Earth is to the Water, so is the Water to the Aire, and the Aire to the Fire. And this is the root and foundation of all bodies, natures, vertues, and wonderfull works; and he which shall know these qualities of the Elements, and their mixtions, shall easily bring to pass such things that are wonderfull, and astonishing, and shall be perfect in Magick.
There are then, as we have said, four Elements, without the perfect knowledge whereof we can effect nothing in Magick. Now each of them is three-fold, that so the number of four may make up the number of twelve; and by passing by the number of seven into the number of ten, there may be a progress to the supream Unity, upon which all vertue and wonderfull operation depends. Of the first Order are the pure Elements, which are neither compounded nor changed, nor admit of mixtion, but are incorruptible, and not of which, but through which the vertues of all naturall things are brought forth into act. No man is able to declare their vertues, because they can do all things upon all things. He which is ignorant of these, shall never be able to bring to pass any wonderfull matter. Of the second Order are Elements that are compounded, changeable, and impure, yet such as may by art be reduced to their pure simplicity, whose vertue, when they are thus reduced to their simplicity, doth above all things perfect all occult, and common operations of nature: and these are the foundation of the whole naturall Magick. Of the third Order are those Elements, which originally and of themselves are not Elements, but are twice compounded, various, and changeable one into the other. They are the infallible Medium, and therefore are called the middle nature, or Soul of the middle nature: Very few there are that understand the deep mysteries thereof. In them is, by means of certain numbers, degrees, and orders, the perfection of every effect in what thing soever, whether Naturall, Celestiall, or Supercelestiall; they are full of wonders, and mysteries, and are operative, as in Magick Naturall, so Divine: For from these, through them, proceed the bindings, loosings, and transmutations of all things, the knowing and foretelling of things to come, also the driving forth of evill, and the gaining of good spirits. Let no man, therefore, without these three sorts of Elements, and the knowledge thereof, be confident that he is able to work any thing in the occult Sciences of Magick, and Nature. But whosoever shall know how to reduce those of one Order, into those of another, impure into pure, compounded into simple, and shall know how to understand distinctly the nature, vertue, and power of them in number, degrees, and order, without dividing the substance, he shall easily attain to the knowledge, and perfect operation of all Naturall things, and Celestiall secrets.
There are two things (saith Hermes) viz Fire and Earth, which are sufficient for the operation of all wonderfull things: the former is active, the latter passive. Fire (as saith Dionysius) in all things, and through all things, comes and goes away bright, it is in all things bright, and at the same time occult, and unknown; When it is by it self (no other matter coming to it, in which it should manifest its proper action) it is boundless, and invisible, of it self sufficient for every action that is proper to it, moveable, yielding it self after a maner to all things that come next to it, renewing, guarding nature, enlightening, not comprehended by lights that are vailed  over, clear, parted, leaping back, bending upwards, quick in motion, high, alwayes raising motions, comprehending another, not Comprehended it self, not standing in need of another, secretly increasing of it self, and manifesting its greatness to things that receive it; Active, Powerfull, Invisibly present in all things at once; it will not be affronted or opposed, but as it were in a way of revenge, it will reduce on a sudden things into obedience to it self; incomprehensible, impalpable, not lessened, most rich in all disensations of it self. Fire (as saith Pliny) is the boundless, and mischievous part of the nature of things, it being a question whether it destroys, or produceth most things. Fire it self is one, and penetrates through all things (as say the Pythagorians) also spread abroad in the Heavens, and shining: but in the infernall place streightened, dark, and tormenting, in the mid way it partakes of both. Fire therefore in it self is one, but in that which receives it, manifold, and in differing subjects it is distributed in a different manner, as Cleanthes witnesseth in Cicero. That fire then, which we use is fetched out of other things. It is in stones, and is fetched out by the stroke of the steele; it is in Earth, and makes that, after digging up, to smoake: it is in Water, and heats springs, and wells: it is in the depth of the Sea, and makes that, being tossed with winds, warm: it is in the Aire, and makes it (as we oftentimes see) to burn. And all Animals, and living things whatsoever, as also all Vegetables are preserved by heat: and every thing that lives, lives by reason of the inclosed heat. The properties of the Fire that is above, are heat, making all things Fruitfull, and light, giving life to all things. The properties of the infernall Fire are a parching heat, consuming all things, and darkness, making all things barren. The Celestiall, and bright Fire drives away spirits of darkness; also this our Fire made with Wood drives away the same, in as much as it hath an Analogy with, and is the vehiculum of that Superior light; as also of him, who saith, I am the Light of the World, which is true Fire, the Father of lights, from whom every good thing that is given, Comes; sending forth the light of his Fire, and communicating it first to the Sun, and the rest of the Celestiall bodies, and by these, as by mediating instruments, conveying that light into our Fire. As, therefore the spirits of darkness are stronger in the dark: so good spirits, which are Angels of Light, are augmented, not only by that light, which is Divine, of the Sun, and Celestiall, but also by the light of our common Fire. Hence it was that the first, and most wise institutors of Religions, and Ceremonies ordained, that Prayers, Singings, and all manner of Divine Worships whatsoever should not be performed without lighted Candles, or Torches. (Hence also was that significant saying of Pythagoras, Do not speak of God without a Light) and they commanded that for the driving away of wicked spirits, Lights and Fires should be kindled by the Corpses of the dead, and that they should not be removed untill the expiations were after a Holy manner performed, and they buried. And the great Jehovah himself in the old Law Commanded that all his Sacrifices should be offered with Fire, and that Fire should always be burning upon the Altar, which Custome the Priests of the Altar did always observe, and keep amongst the Romanes. Now the Basis, and foundation of all the Elements, is the Earth, for that is the object, subject, and receptacle of all Celestiall rayes, and influencies; in it are contained the seeds, and Seminall vertues of all things; and therefore it is said to be Animall, Vegetable, and Minerall. It being made fruitfull by the other Elements, and the Heavens, brings forth all things of it self; It receives the abundance of all things, and is, as it were the first fountain, from whence all things spring, it is the Center, foundation, and mother of all things. Take as much of it as you please, seperated, washed, depurated, subtilized, if you let it lye  in the open Aire a little while, it will, being full, and abounding with Heavenly vertues, of it self bring forth Plants, Worms, and other living things, also Stones, and bright sparks of Metals. In it are great secrets, if at any time it shall be purified by the help of Fire, and reduced unto its simplicity by a convenient washing. It is the first matter of our Creation, and the truest Medicine that can restore, and preserve us.
The other two Elements, viz Water, and Aire, are not less efficacious then the former; neither is nature wanting to work wonderfull things in them. There is so great a necessity of Water, that without it no living thing can live. No Hearb, nor Plant whatsoever, without the moistening of Water can branch forth. In it is the Seminary vertue of all things, especially of Animals, whose seed is manifestly waterish. The seeds also of Trees, and Plants, although they are earthy, must notwithstanding of necessity be rotted in Water, before they can be fruitfull; whether they be imbibed with the moisture of the Earth, or with Dew, or Rain, or any other Water that is on purpose put to them. For Moses writes, that only Earth, and Water bring forth a living soul. But he ascribes a twofold production of things to Water, viz of things swimming in the Waters, and of things flying in the Aire above the Earth. And that those productions that are made in, and upon the Earth, are partly attributed to the very Water, the same Scripture testifies, where it saith that the Plants, and the Hearbs  did not grow, because God had not caused it to rain upon the Earth. Such is the efficacy of this Element of Water, that Spirituall regeneration cannot be done without it, as Christ himself testified to Nicodemus. Very great also is the vertue of it in the Religious Worship of God, in expiations, and purifications; yea, the necessity of it is no less then that of Fire. Infinite are the benefits, and divers are the uses thereof, as being that by vertue of which all things subsist, are generated, nourished and increased. Thence it was that Thales of Miletus, and Hesiod concluded that Water was the beginning of all things, and said it was the first of all the Elements, and the most potent, and that because it hath the mastery over all the rest. For, as Pliny saith, Waters swallow up the Earth, extinguish flames, ascend on high, and by the stretching forth of the clouds, challenge the Heaven for their own: the same falling become the Cause of all things that grow in the Earth. Very many are the wonders that are done by Waters, according to the Writings of Pliny, Solinus, and many other Historians, of the wonderfull vertue whereof, Ovid also makes mention in these Verses.
Josephus also makes relation of the wonderfull nature of a certain river betwixt Arcea, and Raphanea, Cities of Syria: which runs with a full Channell all the Sabboth  Day, and then on a sudden ceaseth, as if the springs were stopped, and all the six dayes you may pass over it dry-shod: but again, on the seaventh day (no man knowing the reason of it) the Waters return again in abundance, as before. Wherefore the inhabitants thereabout called it the Sabboth-day river, because of the Seaventh day, which was holy to the Jews. The Gospel also testifies to a sheep-pool, into which whosoever stepped first, after the Water was troubled by the Angel, was made whole of whatsoever disease he had. The same vertue, and efficacy we read was in a spring of the Ionian Nymphs, which was in the territories belonging to the Town of Elis, at a Village called Heraclea, neer the river Citheron: which whosoever stepped into, being diseased, came forth whole, and cured of all his diseases. Pausanias also reports, that in Lyceus, a mountain of Arcadia, there was a spring called Agria, to which, as often as the dryness of the Region threatned  the destruction of fruits, Jupiters Priest of Lyceus went, and after the offering of Sacrifices, devoutly praying to the Waters of the Spring, holding a Bough of an Oke  in his hand, put it down to the bottome of the hallowed Spring; Then the waters being troubled, a Vapour ascending from thence into the Air was blown into Clouds, with which being joyned together, the whole Heaven was overspread: which being a little after dissolved into rain, watered all the Country most wholsomly. Moreover Ruffus a Physitian  of Ephesus, besides many other Authours, wrote strange things concerning the wonders of Waters, which, for ought I know, are found in no other Authour.
It remains that I speak of the Aire. This is a vitall spirit, passing through all Beings, giving life, and subsistence to all things, binding, moving, and filling all things. Hence it is that the Hebrew Doctors reckon it not amongst the Elements, but count it as a Medium or glew, joyning things together, and as the resounding spirit of the worlds instrument. It immediately receives into it self the influences of all Celestiall bodies, and then communicates them to the other Elements, as also to all mixt  bodies: Also it receives into it self, as it were a divine Looking-glass, the species of all things, as well naturall, as artificiall, as also of all manner of speeches, and retains them; And carrying them with it, and entering into the bodies of Men, and other Animals, through their pores, makes an Impression upon them, as well when they sleep, as when they be awake, and affords matter for divers strange Dreams and Divinations. Hence they say it is, that a man passing by a place where a man was slain, or the Carkase  newly hid, is moved with fear and dread; because the Aire in that place being full of the dreadfull species of Man-slaughter, doth, being breathed in, move and trouble the spirit of the man with the like species, whence it is that be comes to be afraid. For every thing that makes a sudden impression, astonisheth nature. Whence it is, that many Philosophers were of opinion that Aire is the cause of dreams, and of many other impressions of the mind, through the prolonging of Images, or similitudes, or species (which are fallen from things and speeches, multiplyed in the very Aire) untill they come to the senses, and then to the phantasy, and soul of him that receives them, which being freed from cares, and no way hindred, expecting to meet such kind of species, is informed by them. For the species of things, although of their own proper nature they are carryed to the senses of men, and other animals in generall, may notwithstanding get some impression from the Heaven, whilest they be in the Aire, by reason of which, together with the aptness and disposition of him that receives them, they may be carryed to the sence  of one rather then of another. And hence it is possible naturally, and far from all manner of superstition, no other spirit coming between, that a man should be able in a very time to signifie his mind unto another man, abiding at a very long and unknown distance from him; although he cannot precisely give an estimate of the time when it is, yet of necessity it must be within  hours; and I my self know how to do it, and have often done it. The same also in time past did the Abbot Tritemius  both know and do. Also, when certain appearances, not only spirituall, but also naturall do flow forth from things, that is to say, by a certain kind of flowings forth of bodies from bodies, and do gather strength in the Air, they offer, and shew themselves to us as well through light as motion, as well to the sight as to other senses, and sometimes work wonderfull things upon us, as Plotinus proves and teacheth. And we see how by the South wind the Air is condensed into thin clouds, in which, as in a Looking-glass are reflected representations at a great distance of Castles, Mountains, Horses, and Men, and other things, which when the clouds are gone, presently vanish. And Aristotle in his Meteors shews, that a Rainbow is conceived in a cloud of the Aire, as in a Looking-glass. And Albertus saith, that the effigies of bodies may by the strength of nature, in a moist Aire be easily represented, in the same manner as the representations of things are in things. And Aristotle tels of a man, to whom it happened by reason of the weakness of his sight, that the Aire that was near to him, became as it were a Looking-glass to him, and the optick beam did relect back upon himself, and could not penetrate the Aire, so that whithersoever he went, he thought he saw his own image, with his face towards him, go before him. In like manner, by the artificialnes of some certain Looking-glasses, may be produced at a distance in the Aire, beside the Looking-glasses, what images we please; which when ignorant men see, they think they see the appearances of spirits, or souls; when indeed they are nothing else but semblances kin to themselves, and without life. And it is well known, if in a dark place where there is no light but by the coming in of a beam of the sun somewhere through a litle hole, a white paper, or plain Looking-glass be set up against that light, that there may be seen upon them, whatsoever things are done without, being shined upon by the Sun. And there is another sleight, or trick yet more wonderfull. If any one shall take images artificially painted, or written letters, and in a clear night set them against the beams of the full Moon, whose resemblances being multiplyed in the Aire, and caught upward, and reflected back together with the beams of the Moon, any other man that is privy to the thing, at a long distance sees, reads, and knows them in the very compass, and Circle of the Moon, which Art of declaring secrets is indeed very profitable for Towns, and Cities that are besieged, being a thing which Pythagoras long since did often do, and which is not unknown to some in these dayes, I will not except my self. And all these, and many more, and greater then these, are grounded in the very nature of the Aire, and have their reasons, and causes declared in Mathematicks, and Opticks. And as these resemblances are reflected back to the sight, so also sometimes to the hearing, as is manifest in the Echo. But there are more secret arts then these, and such whereby any one may at a very remote distance hear, and understand what another speaks, or whispers softly.
Next after the four simple Elements follow the four kinds of perfect Bodies compounded of them, and they are Stones, Metals, Plants, and Animals: and although unto the generation of each of these all the Elements meet together in the composition, yet every one of them follows, and resembles one of the Elements, which is most predominant. For all Stones are earthy, for they are naturally heavy, and descend, and so hardened with dryness, that they cannot be melted. But Metals are waterish, and may be melted, which Naturalists confess, and Chymists  finde to be true, viz that they are generated of a viscous Water, or waterish argent vive. Plants have such an affinity with the Aire, that unless they be abroad in the open Aire, they do neither bud, nor increase. So also all Animals
And Fire is so naturall to them, that that being extinguished they presently dye. And again every one of those kinds is distinguished within it self by reason of degrees of the Elements. For amongst the Stones they especially are called earthy that are dark, and more heavy; and those waterish, which are transparent, and are compacted of water, as Crystall, Beryll, and Pearls in the shels  of Fishes: and they are called airy, which swim upon the Water, and are spongious, as the Stones of a Sponge, the pumice Stone, and the Stone Sophus: and they are called fiery, out of which fire is extracted, or which are resolved into Fire, or which are produced of Fire: as Thunderbolts, Fire-stones, and the Stone Asbestus. Also amongst Metals, Lead, and Silver are earthy; Quicksilver is waterish: Copper, and Tin are airy: and Gold, and Iron are fiery. In Plants also, the roots resemble the Earth, by reason of their thickness: and the leaves, Water, because of their juice: Flowers, the Aire, because of their subtility, and the Seeds the Fire, by reason of their multiplying spirit. Besides, they are called some hot, wine cold, sonic moist, some dry, borrowing their names from the qualifies of the Elements. Amongst Animals also, some are in comparison of others earthy, and dwell in the bowels of the Earth, as Worms and Moles, and many other small creeping Vermine; others are watery, as Fishes; others airy, which cannot live out of the Aire: others also are fiery, living in the Fire, as Salamanders, and Crickets, such as are of a fiery heat, as Pigeons, Estriches, Lions, and such as the wise man cals beasts breathing Fire. Besides, in Animals the Bones resemble the Earth, Flesh the Aire, the vital spirit the Fire, and the humors the Water. And these humors also partake of the Elements, for yellow choller  is instead of Fire, blood instead of Aire, Flegme  instead of Water, and black choller, or melancholy instead of Earth. And lastly, in the Soul it self, according to Austin, the understanding resembles Fire, reason the Aire, imagination the Water, and the senses the Earth. And these senses also are divided amongst themselves by reason of the Elements, for the sight is fiery, neither can it perceive without Fire, and Light: the hearing is airy, for a sound is made by the striking of the Aire; The smell, and tast  resemble the Water, without the moisture of which there is neither smell, nor tast; and lastly the feeling is wholly earthy, and taketh gross bodies for its object. The actions also, and the operations of man are governed by the Elements. The Earth signifies a slow, and firm motion; The water signifies fearfulness, & sluggishness, and remisseness in working: Aire signifies chearfulness, and an amiable disposition: but Fire a fierce, quick and angry disposition. The Elements therefore are the first of all things, and all things are of, and according to them, and they are in all things, and diffuse their vertues through all things.
It is the unanimous consent of all Platonists, that as in the originall, and exemplary World, all things are in all; so also in this corporeal world, all things are in all; so also the Elements are not only in these inferior bodies, but also in the Heavens, in Stars, in Divels, in Angels, and lastly in God, the maker and originall example of all things. Now in these inferiour bodies the Elements are accompanied with much gross matter; but in the Heavens the Elements are with their natures, and vertues, viz after a Celestiall, and more excellent manner, then in sublunary things. For the firmness of the Celestiall Earth is there without the grossness of Water: and the agility of the Aire without running over its bounds; the heat of Fire without burning, only shining, and giving life to all things by its heat. Amongst the Stars, also, some are fiery, as Mars, and Sol; airy, as Jupiter, and Venus: watery, as Saturn, and Mercury: and earthy, such as inhabit the eighth Orbe, and the Moon (which notwithstanding by many is accounted watery) seeing, as if it were Earth, it attracts to it self the Celestiall waters, with which being imbibed, it doth by reason of its neerness  to us power  out, and communicate to us. There are also amongst the signes, some fiery, some earthy, some airy, some watery: the Elements rule them also in the Heavens, distributing to them these four threefold considerations Of every Element, viz the beginning, middle, and end: so Aries possesseth the beginning of Fire, Leo the progress, and increase, and Sagittarius the end. Taurus the beginning of the Earth, Virgo the progress, Capricorn the end. Gemini the beginning of the Aire, Libra the progress, Aquarius the end. Cancer the beginning of Water, Scorpius  the middle, and Pisces the end. Of the mixtions therefore of these Planets and Signes, together with the Elements are all bodies made. Moreover Divels  also are upon this account distinguished the one from the other, so that some are called fiery, some earthy, some airy, and some watery. Hence also those four Infernall Rivers, fiery Phlegethon, airy Cocytus, watery Styx, earthy Acheron. Also in the Gospel we read of Hell Fire, and eternall Fire, into which the Cursed shall be commanded to go: and in the Revelation we read of a Lake of Fire, and Isaiah speaks of the damned, that the Lord will smite them with corrupt Aire. And in Job, They shall skip from the Waters of the Snow to extremity of heat, and in the same we read, That the Earth is dark, and covered with the darkness of death, and miserable darkness. Moreover also these Elements are placed in the Angels in Heaven, and the blessed Intelligencies; there is in them a stability of their essence, which is an earthly vertue, in which is the stedfast seat of God; also their mercy, and piety is a watery cleansing vertue. Hence by the Psalmist they are called Waters, where he speaking of the Heavens, saith, Who rulest the Waters that are higher then the Heavens  also in them their subtill  breath is Aire, and their love is shining Fire. Hence they are called in Scripture the Wings of the Wind; and in another place the Psalmist speaks of them, Who makest Angels thy Spirits, and thy Ministers a flaming fire. Also according to orders of Angels, some are fiery, as Seraphin, and authorities, and powers; earthy as Cherubin; watery as Thrones, and Archangels: airy as Dominions, and Principalities. Do we not also read of the original maker of all things, that the earth shall he opened and bring forth a Saviour? Is it not spoken of the same, that he shall be a fountain of living Water, cleansing and regenerating? Is not the same Spirit breathing the breath of life; and the same according to Moses, and Pauls testimony, A consuming Fire? That Elements therefore are to be found every where, and in all things after their manner, no man can deny: First in these inferiour bodies feculent and gross, and in Celestials more pure, and clear; but in supercelestials living, and in all respects blessed. Elements therefore in the exemplary world are Ideas of things to be produced, in Intelligencies are distributed powers, in Heavens are vertues, and in inferiour bodies gross forms.
Of the naturall vertues of things, some are Elementary, as to heat, to cool, to moisten, to dry; and they are called operations, or first qualities, and the second act: for these qualities only do wholly change the whole substance, which none of the other qualities can do. And some are in things compounded of Elements, and these are more then first qualities, and such are those that are maturating, digesting, resolving, mollifying, hardening, restringing, absterging, corroding, burning, opening, evaporating, strengthening, mitigating, conglutinating, obstructing, expelling, retaining, attracting, repercussing, stupifying, bestowing, lubrifying, and many more. Elementary qualities do many things in a mixt  body, which they cannot do in the Elements themselves. And these operations are called secondary qualities, because they follow the nature, and proportion of the mixtion of the first vertues, as largely it is treated of in Physick  Books. As maturation, which is the operation of naturall heat, according to a certain proportion in the substance of the matter. Induration is the operation of cold; so also is congelation, and so of the rest. And these operations sometimes act upon a certain member, as such which provoke Urine, Milk, the Menstrua, and they are called third qualities, which follow the second, as the second do the first. According therefore to these first, second, and third qualities many diseases are both cured, and caused. Many things also there are artificially made, which men much wonder at; as is Fire, which burns Water, which they call the Greek Fire, of which Aristotle teacheth many compositions in his particular Treatise of this subject. In like manner there is made a Fire that is extinguished with Oyl, and is kindled with cold Water, when it is sprinkled upon it; and a Fire which is kindled either with Rain, Wind, or the Sun; and there is made a Fire, which is called burning Water, the Confection whereof is well known, and it consumes nothing but it self: and also there are made Fires that cannot be quenched, and incombustible Oyles, and perpetuall Lamps, which can be extinguished neither with Wind, nor Water, nor any other way; which seems utterly incredible, but that there had been such a most famous Lamp, which once did shine in the Temple of Venus, in which the stone Asbestos did burn, which being once fired can never be extinguished. Also on the contrary, Wood, or any other combustible matter may be so ordered, that it can receive no harm from the Fire; and there are made certain Confections, with which the hands being anointed, we may carry red hot Iron in them, or put them into melted Metall, or go with our whole bodies, being first anointed therewith, into the Fire without any manner of harm, and such like things as these may be done. There is also a kind of flax, which Pliny calls Asbestum, the Greeks call ασβεστον, which is not consumed by Fire, of which Anaxilaus saith, that a Tree compassed about with it, may be cut down with insensible blows, that cannot be heard.
There are also other vertues in things, which are not from any Element, as to expell poyson, to drive away the noxious vapours of Minerals, to attract Iron, or any thing else; and these vertues are a sequell of the species, and form of this or that thing; whence also they being little in quantity, are of great efficacy; which is not granted to any Elementary quality. For these vertues having much form, and litle matter, can do very much; but an Elementary vertue, because it hath more materiality, requires much matter for its acting. And they are called occult qualities, because their Causes lie hid, and mans intellect cannot in any way reach, and find them out. Wherefore Philosophers have attained to the greatest part of them by long experience, rather then by the search of reason: for as in the Stomack  the meat is digested by heat, which we know; so it is changed by a certain hidden vertue which we know not: for truly it is not changed by heat, because then it should rather be changed by the Fire side, then in the Stomack. So there are in things, besides the Elementary qualities which we know, other certain imbred vertues created by nature, which we admire, and are amazed at, being such as we know not, and indeed seldom or never have seen. As we read in Ovid of the Phoenix, one only Bird, which renews her self.
Long since Metreas  brought a very great wonderment upon the Greeks, and Romans concerning himself. He said that he nourished, and bred a beast that did devour it self. Hence many to this day are solicitous, what this beast of Matreas should be. Who would not wonder that Fishes should be digged out of the Earth, of which Aristotle, Theophrastus, and Polybius the Historian makes mention? And those things which Pausanius wrote concerning the singing Stones? All these are effects of occult vertues. So the Estrich  concocts cold, and most hard Iron, and digests it into nourishment for his body; whose Stomack  they also report, cannot be hurt with red hot Iron. So that little Fish called Echeneis doth so curb the violence of the Winds, and appease the rage of the Sea, that, let the Tempests be never so imperious, and raging, the Sails also bearing a full Gale, it doth notwithstanding by its meer touch stay the Ships, and makes them stand still, that by no means they can be moved. So Salamanders, and Crickets live in the Fire; although they seem sometimes to burn, yet they are not hurt. The like is said of a kind of Bitumen, with which the weapons of the Amazons were said to be smeared over, by which means they could be spoiled neither with Sword nor Fire; with which also the Gates of Caspia, made of Brass, are reported to be smeared over by Alexander the great. We read also that Noahs Ark was joyned together with this Bitumen, and that it endured some thousands of years upon the Mountains of Armenia. There are many such kind of wonderfull things, scarce credible, which notwithstanding are known by experience. Amongst which Antiquity makes mention of Satyrs, which were Animals, in shape half men, and half bruits, yet capable of speech, and reason; one whereof S. Hierome reporteth, spake once unto holy Antonius the Hermite, and condemned the errour of the Gentiles, in worshipping such poor creatures as they were, and desired him that he would pray unto the true God for him; also he affirms that there was one of them shewed openly alive, and afterwards sent to Constantine the Emperour.
Platonists say that all inferiour bodies are exemplified by the superiour Ideas. Now they define an Idea to be a form, above bodies, souls, minds, and to be one, simple, pure, immutable, indivisible, incorporeal, and eternall: and that the nature of all Ideas is the same. Now they place Ideas in the first place in very goodness it self (i.e.) God, by way of cause; and that they are distinguished amongst themselves by some relative considerations only, least whatsoever is in the world, should be but one thing without any variety, and that they agree in essence, least God should be a compound substance. In the second place, they place them in the very intelligible it self (i.e.) in the Soul of the world, differing the one from the other by absolute forms, so that all the Ideas in God indeed are but one form: but in the Soul of the world they are many. They are placed in the minds of all other things, whether they be joyned to the body, or separated from the body, by a certain participation, and now by degrees are distinguished more, and more. They place them in nature, as certain small seed of forms infused by the Ideas, and lastly they place them in matter, as Shadows. Hereunto may be added, that in the Soul of the world there be as many Seminal Forms of things, as Ideas in the mind of God, by which forms she did in the Heavens above the Stars frame to her self shapes also, and stamped upon all these some properties; on these Stars therefore, shapes, and properties, all vertues of inferiour species, as also their properties do depend; so that every species hath its Celestiall shape, or figure that is sutable  to it from which also proceeds a wonderfull power of operating, which proper gift it receives from its own Idea, through the Seminal forms of the Soul of the world. For Ideas are not only essential causes of every species, but are also the causes of every vertue, which is in the species: and this is that which many Philosophers say, that the properties which are in the nature of things (which vertues indeed are the operations of the Ideas) are moved by certain vertues, viz such as have a certain, and sure foundation, not fortuitous, nor casuall, but efficacious, powerfull, and sufficient, doing nothing in vain. Now these Vertues do not err in their actings, but by accident, viz by reason of the impurity, or inequality of the matter: For upon this account there are found things of the same species, more, or less powerful, according to the purity, or indisposition of the matter; for all Celestial Influences may be hindred by the indisposition, and insufficiency of the matter. Whence it was a Proverb amongst the Platonists, That Celestial Vertues were infused according to the desert of the matter: Which also Virgil makes mention of, when he sings,
There are also in many Individuals, or particular things, peculiar gifts, as wonderfull, as in the species, and these also are from the figure, and situation of Celestiall Stars. For every Individuall, when it begins to be under a determined Horoscope, and Celestiall Constellation, Contracts together with its essence a certain wonderfull vertue both of doing, and suffering something that is remarkable, even besides that which it receives from its species, and this it doth partly by the influence of the Heaven, and partly through that obedientialness of the matter of things to be generated, to the Soul of the World, which obedientialness indeed is such as that of our bodies to our souls. For we perceive that there is this in us, that according to our conceptions of things, our bodies are moved, and that cheerfully, as when we are afraid of, or fly from any thing. So many times when the Celestiall souls conceive several things, then the matter is moved obedientially to it: Also in Nature there appear divers prodigies, by reason of the imagination of superiour motions. So also they conceive, & imagine divers vertues, not only things naturall, but also sometimes things artificial, and this especially if the Soul of the operator be inclined towards the same. Whence Avicen saith, that whatsoever things are done here, must have been before in the motions, and conceptions of the Stars, and Orbes. So in things, various effects, inclinations, and dispositions are occasioned not only from the matter variously disposed, as many suppose, but from a various influence, and diverse form; not truly with a specifical difference, but peculiar, and proper. And the degrees of these are variously distributed by the first Cause of all things, God himself, who being unchangeable, distributes to every one as he pleaseth, with whom notwithstanding second Causes, Angelical and Celestial, cooperate, disposing of the Corporeal matter, and other things that are committed to them. All vertues therefore are infused by God, through the Soul of the World, yet by a particular power of resemblances, and intelligences over-ruling them, and concourse of the rayes, and aspects of the Stars in a certain peculiar harmonious consent.
It is well known to all, that there is a Certain vertue in the Loadstone, by which it attracts Iron, and that the Diamond doth by its presence take away that vertue of the Loadstone: so also Amber, and jeat  rubbed, and warmed draw a straw to them, and the Stone Asbestus  being once fired is never, or scarce extinguished: a Carbuncle shines in the dark, the Stone Aetites put above the young fruit of Women, or Plants, strengthens them, but being put under, causeth abortion; the Jasper stencheth  blood; the litle fish Echeneis stops the ships: Rhubarb expels choller; the liver of the Camelion  burnt, raiseth showers, and thunders. The Stone Heliotrope dazles  the sight, and makes him that wears it to be invisible, the Stone Lyucurius takes away delusions from before the eyes, the perfume of the Stone Lypparis cals forth all the beasts, the Stone Synochitis brings up infernal Ghosts, the Stone Anachitis makes the images of the Gods appear. The Ennecis put under them that dream, causeth Oracles. There is an Hearb  in Æthiopia, with which they report ponds, and lakes are dryed  up, and all things that are shut, to be opened; and we read of an Hearb  called Latace which the Persian Kings give to their Embassadours, that whithersoever they shall come, they shall abound with plenty of all things. There is also a Scythian Hearb, with which being tasted, or at least held in the mouth, they report the Scythians will endure twelve dayes hunger, and thirst; and Apuleius saith, that he was taught by an Oracle that there were many kinds of Hearbs, and Stones, with which men might prolong their lives for ever, but that it was not lawfull for men to understand the knowledge of those things, because, whereas they have but a short time to live, they study mischief with all their might, and attempt all manner of wickedness; if they should be sure of a very long time, they would not spare the Gods themselves. But from whence these vertues are, none of all these have shewed, who have set forth huge Volumes of the properties of things, not Hermes, not Bochus, not Aaron, not Orpheus, not Theophrastus, not Thebith, not Zenothemis, not Zoroaster, not Evax, not Dioscorides, not Isaaick the Jew, not Zacharias the Babilonian, not Albertus, not Arnoldus; and yet all these have confessed the same, that Zacharias writes to Mithridites, that great power, and humane destinies are couched in the vertues of Stones and Hearbs. But to know from whence these come, a higher speculation is required. Alexander the peripateticke not going any further then his senses, and qualities, is of the opinion that these proceed from Elements, and their qualities, which haply might be supposed to be true, if those were of the same species; but many of the operations of the Stones agree neither in genere, nor specie. Therefore Plato, and his Schollers  attribute these vertues to Ideas, the formers of things. But Avicen reduceth these kinds of operations to Intelligencies, Hermes to the Stars, Albertus to the specificall forms of things. And although these Authors seem to thwart one the other, yet none of them, if they be rightly understood, goes beside the truth: since all their sayings are the same in effect in most things. For God in the first place is the end, and begining of all Vertues, he gives the seal of the Ideas to his servants the Intelligencies; who as faithfull officers sign all things intrusted  to them with an Ideall Vertue, the Heavens, and Stars, as instruments, disposing the matter in the mean while for the receiving of those forms which reside in Divine Majesty (as saith Plato in Timeus) and to be conveyed by Stars; and the Giver of forms distributes them by the Ministry of his Intelligencies, which he hath set as Rulers, and Controllers over his Works, to whom such a power is intrusted in things committed to them, that so all Vertues of Stones, Hearbs, Metals, and all other things may come from the Intelligencies, the Governours. The Form therefore, and Vertue of things comes first from the Ideas, then from the ruling, and governing Intelligencies, then from the aspects of the Heavens disposing, and lastly from the tempers of the Elements disposed, answering the influencies of the Heavens, by which the Elements themselves are ordered, or disposed. These kinds of operations therefore are performed in these inferiour things by express forms, and in the Heavens by disposing vertues, in Intelligencies by mediating rules, in the original Cause by Ideas, and exemplary forms, all which must of necessity agree in the execution of the effect, and vertue of every thing.
There is therefore a wonderfull vertue, and operation in every Hearb  and Stone, but greater in a Star, beyond which, even from the governing Intelligencies every thing receiveth, and obtains many things for it self, especially from the Supream Cause, with whom all things do mutually, and exactly correspond, agreeing in an harmonious consent, as it were in Hymnes, alwaies praising the highest Maker of all things, as by the three Children in the fiery furnace were all things called upon to praise God with singings. Bless ye the Lord all things that grow upon the Earth, and all things which move in the Waters, all fowls of the Heavens, Beasts, and Cattle, together with the sons of men. There is therefore no other cause of the necessity of effects, then the connexion  of all things with the first Cause, and their correspondency with those Divine patterns, and eternall Ideas, whence every thing hath its determinate, and particular place in the exemplary world, from whence it lives, and receives its originall being; And every vertue of Hearbs, Stones, Metals, Animals, Words, and Speeches, and all things that are of God, is placed there. Now the first Cause, which is God, although he doth by Intelligencies, and the Heavens work upon these inferiour things, doth sometimes (these Mediums being laid aside, or their officiating being suspended) works those things immediatly by himself, which works then are called Miracles: But whereas secondary causes, which Plato, and others call handmaids, do by the Command, and appointment of the first Cause, necessarily act, and are necessitated to produce their effects, if God shall notwithstanding according to his pleasure so discharge, and suspend them, that they shall wholly desist from the necessity of that Command, and appointment; then they are called the greatest Miracles of God. So the fire in the Chaldeans furnace did not burn the Children: So also the Sun at the Command of Joshua went back from its course the space of one whole day; so also at the prayer of Hezekiah it went back ten degrees, or hours. So when Christ was Crucified the Sun was darkened, though at full Moon: And the reasons these operations can by no rationall discourse, no Magick, or occult, or profound Science whatsoever be found out, or understood, but are to be learned, and inquired into by Divine Oracles only.
Democritus and Orpheus, and many Pythagorians having most diligently searched into the vertues of Celestiall things, and natures of inferior things, said, That all things are full of God, and not without cause: For there is nothing of such transcending vertues, which being destitute of Divine assistance, is content with the nature of it self. Also they called those Divine Powers which are diffused in things, Gods: which Zoroaster called Divine allurements, Synesius Symbolicall inticements, others called them Lives, and some also Souls, saying, that the vertues of things did depend upon these; because it is the property of the Soul to be from one matter extended into divers things, about which it operates: So is a man, who extends his intellect unto intelligible things, and his imagination unto imaginable things; and this is that which they understood, when they said, viz That the Soul of one thing went out, and went into another thing, altering it, and hindering the operations of it: As the Diamond hinders the operation of the Loadstone, that it cannot attract Iron. Now seeing the Soul is the first thing that is moveable, and as they say, is moved of it self; but the body, or the matter is of it self unable, and unfit for motion, and doth much degenerate from the Soul, therefore they say there is need of a more excellent Medium, viz Such a one that may be as it were no body, but as it were a Soul, or as it were no Soul, but as it were a body, viz by which the soul may be joyned to the body. Now they conceive such a medium to be the spirit of the World, viz that which we call the quintessence: because it is not from the four Elements, but a certain first thing, having its being above, and besides them. There is therefore such a kind of spirit required to be, as it were the medium, whereby Celestiall Souls are joyned to gross bodies, and bestow upon them wonderfull gifts. This spirit is after the same manner in the body of the world, as ours is in the body of man. For as the powers of our soul are communicated to the members of the body by the spirit, so also the Vertue of the Soul of the World is diffused through all things by the quintessence: For there is nothing found in the whole world, that hath not a spark of the Vertue thereof. Yet it is more, nay most of all infused into those things which have received, or taken in most of this spirit: Now this spirit is received or taken in by the rayes of the Stars, so far forth as things render themselves conformable to them. By this spirit therefore every occult property is conveyed into Hearbs, Stones, Metals, and Animals, through the Sun, Moon, Planets, and through Stars higher then the Planets. Now this spirit may be more advantageous to us, if any one knew how to separate it from the Elements: or at least to use those things chiefly, which do most abound with this spirit. For these things, in which this spirit is less drowned in a body, and less checked by matter, do more powerfully, and perfectly act, and also more readily generate their like: for in it are all generative, & seminary Vertues. For which cause the Alchymists  endeavour to separate this spirit from Gold, and Silver; which being rightly separated, and extracted, if thou shalt afterward project upon any matter of the same kind (i.e.) any Metall, presently will turn it into Gold, or Silver. And we know how to do that, and have seen it done: but we could make no more Gold, then the weight of that was, out of which we extracted the spirit. For seeing that is an extense form, and not intense, it cannot beyond its own bounds change and imperfect body into a perfect: which I deny not, but may be done by another way.
It is now manifest that the occult properties in things are not from the nature of the Elements, but infused from above, hid from our senses, and scarce at last known by our reason, which indeed come from the Life, and the Spirit of the World, through the rayes of the Stars: and can no otherwise but by experience, and conjecture be enquired into by us. Wherefore, he that desires to enter upon this study must consider, that every thing moves, and turns it self to its like, and inclines that to it self with all its might, as well in property, viz Occult vertue, as in quality, viz Elementary vertue. Sometimes also in substance it self, as we see in Salt, for whatsoever hath long stood with Salt, becomes Salt: for every agent, when it hath begun to act, doth not attempt to make a thing inferiour to it self, but as much as may be, like, and sutable  to it self. Which also we manifestly see in sensible Animals, in which the nutritive Vertue doth not change the meat into an Hearb, or a Plant, but turns it into sensible flesh. In what things therefore there is an excess of any quality, or property, as heat, cold, boldness, fear, sadness, anger, love, hatred, or any other passion, or Vertue; whether it be in them by nature, or sometimes also by art, or chance, as boldness in a harlot; these things do very much move, and provoke to such a quality, passion, or Vertue. So Fire moves to Fire, and Water moves to Water, and be that is bold moves to boldness. And it is well known amongst Physitians, that brain helps the brain, and lungs, the lungs. So also it is said, that the right eye of a Frog helps the soreness of a mans right eye, and the left eye thereof helps the soreness of his left eye, if they be hanged about his neck in a Cloth of its naturall Colour: The like is reported of the eyes of a Crab. So the foot of a Tortoise helps them that have the Gout in their being applyed thus, as foot to foot, hand to hand, right to right, left to left.
After this manner they say, that any Animall that is barren causeth another to be barren; and of the Animall, especially the Testicles, Matrix, or Urin. So they report that a woman shall not conceive, if she drink every moneth of the Urin  of a Mule, or any thing steeped in it. If therefore we would obtain any property or Vertue, let us seek for such Animals, or such other things whatsoever, in which such a property is in a more eminent manner then in any other thing, and in these let us take that part in which such a property, or Vertue is most vigorous: as if at any time we would promote love, let us seek some Animall which is most loving, of which kind are Pigeons, Turtles, Sparrows, Swallows, Wagtailes: and in these take those members, or parts, in which the Venerall  appetite is most vigorous, such as the heart, testicles, matrix, yard, sperme, and menstrues. And it must be done at that time when these Animals have this affection most intense: for then they do provoke, and draw love. In like manner to increase boldness, let us look for a Lyon, or a Cock, and of these let us take the heart, eyes, or forehead. And so we must understand that which Psellus the Platonist saith, viz that Dogs, Crows, and Cocks conduce much to watchfulness: also the Nightingale, and Bat, and horn Owle, and in these the heart, head, and eyes especially. Therefore it is said, if any shall carry the heart of a Crow, or a Bat about him, he shall not sleep till he cast it away from him. The same doth the head of a Bat dryed, and bound to the right arme of him that is awake, for if it be put upon him when he is asleep, it is said, that he shall not be awaked till it be taken off from him. After the same manner doth a Frog, and an Owle make one talkative and of these specially the tongue, and heart; So the tongue also of a Water-frog laid under the head, makes a man speak in his sleep, and the heart of a scrich-Owle  laid upon the left breast of a woman that is asleep is said to make her utter all her secrets. The same also the heart of the horn Owle  is said to do, also the sewet  of a Hare laid upon the breast of one that is asleep. Upon the same account do Animals that are long lived, conduce to long life; and whatsoever things have a power in themselves, to renew themselves, conduce to the renovation of our body, and restoring of youth, which Physitians  have often professed they know to be true; as is manifest of the Viper, and Snake. And it is known that Harts renew their old age by the eating of Snakes. After the same manner the Phoenix is renewed by a fire which she makes for her self; and the like vertue there is in a Pellican, whose right foot being put under warm dung, after three moneths  there is of that generated a Pellican. Therefore some Physitians  by some certain confections made of Vipers, and Hellebor, and the flesh of some such kind of Animals do restore youth, and indeed do sometimes restore it so, as Medea restored old Pileas. It is also believed that the blood of a Bear, if it be sucked out of her wound, doth increase strength of body, because that Animall is the strongest creature.
Thou must know, that so great is the power of naturall things, that they not only work upon all things that are neer them, by their Vertue, but also besides this, they infuse into them a like power, through which by the same Vertue they also work upon other things, as we see in the Loadstone, which Stone indeed doth not only draw Iron Rings, but also infuseth a Vertue into the Rings themselves, whereby they can do the same, which Austin  and Albertus  say they saw. After this manner it is, as they say, that a common harlot, grounded in boldness, and impudence doth infect all that are neer her, by this property, whereby they are made like her self. Therefore they say that if any one shall put on the inward garment of an Harlot, or shall have about him that looking glass, which she daily looks into, he shall thereby become bold, confident, impudent, and wanton. In like manner they say, that a cloth that was about a dead Corpse hath received from thence the property of sadness, and melancholy; and that the halter wherewith a man was hanged hath certain wonderfull properties. The like story tels Pliny, if any shall put a green Lizard made blind, together with Iron, or Gold Rings into a glass-vessel, putting under them some earth, and then shutting the vessel, and when it appears that the Lizard hath received his sight, shall put him out of the glass, that those Rings shall help sore eyes. The same may be done with Rings, and a Weesel, whose eyes after they are with any kind of prick put out, it is certain are restored to sight again. Upon the same account Rings are put for a certain time in the nest of Sparrows, or Swallows, which afterwards are used to procure love, and favor.
In the next place it is requisite that we consider that all things have a friendliness, and enmity amongst themselves, and every thing hath something that it fears & dreads, that is an enemy, and destructive to it; and on the contrary something that it rejoyceth, and delighteth in, and is strengthened by. So in the Elements, Fire is an enemy to Water, and Aire to Earth, but yet they agree amongst themselves. And again, in Celestiall bodies, Mercury, Jupiter, the Sun, and Moon are friends to Saturn; Mars, and Venus enemies to him, all the Planets besides Mars are friends to Jupiter, also all besides Venus hate Mars; Jupiter, and Venus love the Sun, Mars, Mercury, and the Moon are enemies to him, all besides Saturne love Venus; Jupiter, Venus, and Saturne are friends to Mercury, the Sun, Moon, and Mars his enemies. Jupiter, Venus, Saturne are friends to the Moon, Mars, and Mercury her enemies. There is another kind of enmity amongst the Stars, viz when they have opposite houses; as Saturne to the Sun and Moon, Jupiter to Mercury, Mars to Venus. And their enmity is stronger, whose exaltations are opposite: as of Saturne, and the Sun; of Jupiter, and Mars; of Venus, and Mercury. But their friendship is the strongest, who agree in nature, quality, substance, and power; as Mars with the Sun, as Venus with the Moon, as Jupiter with Venus, as also their friendship whose exaltation is in the house of another, as that of Saturne with Venus, of Jupiter with the Moon, of Mars with Saturn, of the Sun with Mars, of Venus with Jupiter, of the Moon with Venus. And of what sort the friendships, and enmities of the superiours be, such are the inclinations of things subjected to them in these inferiour. These dispositions therefore of friendship, and enmity are nothing else but certain inclinations of things of the one to another, desiring such, and such a thing if it be absent, and to move towards it, unless it be hindered, and to acquiess  in it when it is obtained, shunning the contrary, and dreading the approach of it, and not resting in, or being contented with it. Heraclitus therefore being guided by this opinion, professed that all things were made by enmity & friendship. Now the inclinations of Friendship are such in Vegetables and Minerals, as is that attractive inclination, which the Loadstone hath upon Iron, and the Emrald  upon riches, and favour; the Jasper upon the birth of any thing, and the Stone Achates upon Eloquence; In like manner there is a kind of Bituminous Clay that draws Fire, and leaps into it, wheresoever it sees it: Even so doth the root of the Hearb  Aproxis draw Fire from afar off. Also the same inclination there is betwixt the male palme, and female: whereof when the bough of one shall touch the bough of the other, they fold themselves into mutual embraces, neither doth the female bring forth fruit without the male. And the Almond tree, when she is alone is less fruitfull. The Vines love the Elme, and the Olive-tree, and myrtle love one the other: also the Olive-tree, and Fig tree. Now in Animals there is amity betwixt the Blackbird, and Thrush, betwixt the Crow, and Heron, betwixt Peacocks, and Pigeons, Turtles, and Parrats. Whence Sappho writes to Phaon.
Again, the Whale, and the little Fish his guide are friendly. Neither is this amity in Animals amongst themselves, but also with other things, as with Metals, Stones, and Vegetables, so the Cat delights in the Hearb  Nip, by rubbing her self upon which she is said to conceive without a male; and there be Mares in Cappadocia, that expose themselves to the blast of the wind, and by the attraction thereof conceive. So Frogs, Toads, Snakes, and all manner of creeping poisonous things delight in the Plant called Pas-flower, of whom, as the Physitians  say, if any one eat, he shall dye  with laughing. The Tortoise also when he is hunted by the Adder, eats Origanum, and is thereby strengthened: and the Stork, when he hath eat Snakes, seeks for a remedy in Origanum: and the Weesell, when he goes to fight with the Basilisk, eats Rue, whence we come to know that Origanum, and Rue are effectuall against poison. So in some Animals there is an imbred skil, and medicinall art; for when the Toad is wounded with a bite or poison of another Animall, he is wont to go to Rue, or Sage, and Rub the place wounded, and so escapes the danger of the poison. So men have learned many excellent remedies of diseases, & vertues of things from bruits; So Swallows have shewed us that Sallendine is very medicinable for the sight, with which they cure the eyes of their young, and the pye when she is sick, puts a Bay-leafe into her nest, and is recovered. In like maner, Cranes, Dawes, Partriges, Blackbirds purge their nauseous stomacks  with the same, with which also Crows allay the poison of the Chameleon; and the Lyon, if he be feavorish, is recovered by eating of an Ape. The Lapwing being surfetted  with eating of Grapes, cures himself with Southernwood; so the Harts have taught us that the Hearb  Ditany is very good to draw out Darts; for they being wounded with an Arrow, cast it out by eating of this Hearb: the same do Goats in Candy. So Hinds, a little before they bring forth, purge themselves with a certain Hearb  called Mountain Osier. Also they that are hurt with Spiders, seek a remedy by eating of Crabs: Swine also being hurt by Snakes cure themselves by eating of them; and Crows when they perceive they are poisoned with a kinde of French poison, seek for cure in the Oake; Elephants, when they have swallowed a Chameleon help themselves with the wild olive. Bears being hurt with Mandrakes, escape the danger by eating of Pismires. Geese, Ducks, and such like watery fowle, cure themselves with the Hearb  called will-sage. Pigeons, Turtles, Hens, with the Hearb  called Pellitory of the wall. Cranes with Bull-rushes. Leopards cure themselves, being hurt, with the HEarb  called Wolfes-bane, by mans dung: Boars with Ivy, Hinds with the Hearb  called Cinnara.
On the contrary there are inclinations of Emnities, and they are as it were the odium, and anger, indignation, and a certain kind of obstinate contrariety of nature, so that any thing shuns its contrary, and drives it away out of its presence. Such kinds of inclinations hath Rhubarb against Choller, Treacle against poison, the Saphir  Stone against hot biles, and feavorish  heats, and diseases of the eyes; the Amethyst against drunkenness, the Jasper against Flux of blood, and offensive imaginations, the Emrald, and Agnus Castus against Lust, Achates against poison, Piony  against the Falling sickness, Corall against the ebullition of black Choller, and pains of the stomack. The Topaze against spirituall heats, such as are covetousness, lust, and all manner of excesses of love. The like inclination is there also of Pismire  against the Hearb  Origanum, and the wing of a Bat, and the heart of a Lapwing, from the presence of which they flie. Also Origanum  is contrary to a certain poisonous fly, which cannot endure the Sun, and resists Salamanders, and loathes Cabbage with such a deadly hatred, that they destroy one the other; so Cucumbers hate oile, and will run themselves into a ring least they should touch it. And it is said that the Gall of a Crow makes men afraid, and drives them sway from where it is, as also certain other things; so a Diamond doth disagree with the Loadstone, that being set by it, it will not suffer Iron to be drawn to it; and sheep fly from Frog-parsley as from some deadly thing: and that which is more wonderfull, nature hath pictured the sign of this death in the livers of sheep, in which the very figure of Frog-parsley being described, doth naturally appear; So Goats do so hate garden basil, as if there were nothing more pernicious. And again, amongst Animals, Mice, and Weesels  do disagree; whence it is said that Mice will not touch Cheese, if the brains of a Weesel  be put in the rennet, and besides that the Cheese will not be corrupt with age. So a Lizard is so contrary to Scorpions, that it makes them afraid with its very sight, as also it puts them into a cold sweat; therefore they are killed with the oile of them, which oile also cures the wounds made by Scorpions. There is also an enmity betwixt Scorpions, and Mice: wherefore if a Mouse be applyed to a prick or wound made by a Scorpion, it cures it, as it is reported. There is also an enmity betwixt Scorpions, and Stalabors, Aspes, and Waspes. It is reported also that nothing is so much an enemy to Snakes as Crabs, and that if Swine be hurt therewith they eat them, and are cured. The Sun also being in Cancer, Serpents are tormented. Also the Scorpion, and Crocodile kil  one the other; and if the Bird Ibis doth but touch a crocodile with one of his feathers, he makes him immovable; the Bird called Bustard flies away at the sight of a horse; and a Hart runs away at the sight of a Ram, as also of a Viper. An Elephant trembles at the hearing of the grunting of a Hog, so doth a Lyon  at the sight of a Cock: And Panthers will not touch them that are annointed  all over with the broth of a Hen, especially if Garlick hath been boiled in it. There is also enmity betwixt Foxes, and Swans, Buls, and Daws. Amongst Birds also some are at a perpetuall strife one with another, as also with other Animals, as Daws, and Owles, the Kite, and Crows, the Turtle, and Ring-taile, Egepis, and Eagles, Harts, and Dragons. Also amongst Water Animals there is enmity, as betwixt Dolphins, and Whirpools, Mullets, and Pikes, Lampreys, and Congers: Also the fish called Pourcontrel makes the Lobster so much afraid, that the Lobster seeing the other but neer him, is struck dead. The Lobster, and Conger tear one the other. The Civet Cat is said to stand so in awe of the Panther, that he hath no power to resist him, or touch his skin: and they say that if the skins of both of them be hanged up one against the other, the haires of the Panthers skin fall off. And Orus Apollo saith in his Hieroglyphicks, if any one be girt about with the skin of the Civet Cat, that he may pass safely through the middle of his enemies, and not at all be afraid. Also the Lamb is very much afraid of the Wolf, and flies from him. And they say that if the taile, or skin, or head of a Wolf be hanged upon the sheep-coate, the sheep are much troubled, and cannot eat their meat for fear. And Pliny makes mention of a Bird, called Marlin, that breaks Crows Eggs; whose young are so annoyed by the Fox that she also will pinch, and pull the Foxes whelps, and the Fox her self also: which when the Crows see, they help the Fox against her, as against a common enemy. The litle Bird called a Linnet living in Thistles, hates Asses, because they eat the Flowers of Thistles. Also there is such a bitter enmity betwixt the litle bird called Esalon, and the Asse, that their blood will not mix together, and that at the braying of the Asse both the eggs and young of the Esalon perish. There is also such a disagreement betwixt the Olive-tree and a Harlot, that if she Plant it, it will either be alwayes unfruitfull, or altogether wither. A Lyon  fears nothing so much as fired Torches, and will be tamed by nothing so much as by these: and the Wolf fears neither sword, nor spear, but a stone, by the throwing of which a wound being made, worms breed in the Wolf. A Horse fears a Camell, so that he cannot endure to see so much as his picture. An Elephant when he rageth, is quieted by seeing of a Cock. A Snake is afraid of a man that is naked, but pursues a man that is clothed. A mad Bull is tamed by being tyed to a Fig-tree. Amber draws all things to it besides Garden Basill, and those things, which are smeared with oile, betwixt which there is a kinde of a naturall Antipathy.
Moreover thou must consider that the Vertues of things are in some things according to the species, as boldness, and courage in a Lyon, '& Cock: fearfulness in a Hare, or Lamb, ravenousness in a Wolf, treachery, and deceitfulness in a Fox, flattery in a Dog, covetousness in a Crow, and Daw, pride in a Horse, anger in a Tygre, and Boar, sadness, and melancholy in a Cat, lust in a sparrow, and so of the rest. For the greatest part of naturall Vertues doth follow the species. Yet some are in things individually; as there be some men which do so wonderfully abhor the sight of a Cat, that they cannot look upon her without quaking; which fear it is manifest is not in them as they are men. And Avicen tels of a man that lived in his time, whom all poisonous things did shun, all of them dying, which did by chance bite him, he himself not being hurt, and Albertus reports that in a City of the Ubians he saw a wench who would catch Spiders to eat them, and being much pleased with such a kind of meat, was wonderfully nourished therewith. So is boldness in a Harlot, fearfulness in a Thief. And upon this account it is that Philosophers say, that any particular thing that never was sick, is good against any manner of sickness: therefore they say that a bone of a dead man, who never had a feavor, being laid upon the patient, frees him of his quartane. There are also many singular vertues infused into particular things by Celestiall bodies, as we have shewed before.
Again thou must consider, that the vertues of things are in some things in the whole (i.e.) the whole substance of them, or in all their parts, as that little fish Echeneis, which is said to stop a ship by its meer touch, this it doth not do according to any particular part, but according to the whole substance. So the Civet Cat hath this in its whole substance, that Dogs by the very touch of his shadow hold their peace. So Salendine is good for the sight, not according to any one but all its parts, not more in the root then in the leaves, and seeds; and so of the rest. But some vertues are in things according to some parts of it, viz only in the tongue, or eyes, or some other members, and parts; so in the eyes of a Basilisk, is a most violent power to kill men, assoon as they see them: the like power is there in the eyes of the Civet Cat, which makes any Animall that it hath looked upon, to stand still, to be amazed, and not able to move it self. The like vertue is there in the eyes of some Wolfes, which if they see a man first, make him amazed, and so hoarse, that if he would cry out, he hath not the use of his voice: Of this Virgil makes mention, when he sings,
So also there were some certain women in Scythia, and amongst the Illyrians, and Triballians, who as often as they looked angrily upon any man, were said to slay him. Also we read of a certain people of Rhodes, called Telchines, who corrupted all things with their sight, wherefore Jupiter drowned them. Therefore Witches, when they would after this manner work by witchcraft, use the eyes of such kind of Animals in their waters for the eyes, for the like effects. In like manner do Pismires  fly from the heart of a Lapwing, not from the head, foot, or eyes. So the gall of Lizards being bruised in Water is said to gather Weesels  together, not the taile or the head of it; and the gall of Goats put into the Earth in a brazen Vesel, gathers Frogs together; and a Goats liver is an enemy to Butterflies and all Maggots, and dogs shun them that have the heart of a Dog about them, and Foxes will not touch those poultry that have eaten the liver of a Fox. So divers things have divers vertues dispersed variously through several parts, as they are from above infused into them according to the diversity of things to be received; as in a mans body the bones receive nothing but life, the eyes sight, the ears hearing. And there is in mans body a certain little bone, which the Hebrews call LVZ, of the bigness of a pulse that is husked, which is subject to no corruption, neither is it overcome with Fire, but is alwaies preserved unhurt, out of which, as they say, as a Plant out of the seed, our Animall bodies shall in the Resurrection of the dead spring up. And these vertues are not cleared by reason, but by experience.
Moreover we must know that there are some properties in things only whilest they live, and some that remain after their death. So the litle fish Echeneis stops the ships, and the Basilisk, and Catablepa kill with their sight, when they are alive; but when they are dead do no such thing. So they say that in the Colick, if a live Duck be applyed to the belly, it takes away the pain, and her self dies: like to this is that which Archytas sayes. If you take a heart newly taken out of an Animall, and whilest it is yet warm, and hang it upon one that hath a quartane feavor, it drives it away. So if any one swallow the heart of a Lapwing, or a Swallow, or a Weesel, or a Mole whilest it is yet warm with naturall heat, it shall be helpfull to him for remembring, understanding, and foretelling: Hence is this generall rule, viz That whatsoever things are taken out of Animals, whether they be Stones, any Member, Excrements, as Haire, Dung, Nailes, they must be taken from those Animals, whilest they be yet living; and if it be possible, that so they may be alive afterwards. Whence they say, when you take the tongue of a Frog, you must put the Frog into the water again; and if you take the tooth of a Wolf, you must not kill the Wolf; and so of the rest. So writes Democritus, if any one take out the tongue of a water-Frog, yet living, no other part of the body sticking to it, and she be let go into the Water again, & lay it upon the place where the heart beats, of a woman, she shall answer truly whatsoever you ask her. Also they say, that if the eyes of a Frog be before Sun rising bound to the sick party, and the Frog be let go again blind into the Water, they will drive away tertian ague; as also that they will, being bound with the flesh of a Nightingale in the skin of a Hart, keep one alwaies watchfull without sleep. Also the ray of the fork fish being bound to the Navil, is said to make a woman have an easie travel, if it be taken from it alive, and it put into the Sea again. So they say the right eye of a Serpent being applyed, doth help the watering of the eyes, if the Serpent be let go alive. And there is a certain fish, or great Serpent called Myrus, whose eye, if it be pulled out, and bound to the forehead of the patient, is said to cure the inflamation  of the eyes, and that the eye of the fish grows again, and that he is taken blind that did not let the fish go. Also the teeth of all Serpents, being taken out whilest they are alive, and hanged about the patient, are said to cure the quartane. So doth the tooth of a Mole taken out whilest she is alive, being afterwards let go, cure the tooth-ach; and Dogs will not bark at those that have the taile of a Weesel  that is escaped. And Democritus relates that the tongue of a Chameleon, if it be taken from her alive, doth conduce to a good success in trials, and is profitable for women that are in travel, if it be about the outside of the house, for you must take heed that it be not brought into the house, because that would be most dangerous; Moreover there be some properties that remain after death: and of these the Platonists say, that they are things in which the Idea of the matter is less swallowed up, in these, even after death that which is immortall in them, doth not cease to work wonderfull things. So in the Hearbs, and Plants pulled asunder, and dryed, that vertue is quick, and operative which was infused at first into them by the Idea. Thence it is, that as the Eagle all her life time doth overcome all other birds: so also her feathers after her death destroy, and consume the feathers of all other birds. Upon the same account doth a Lyons  skin destroy all other skins: and the skin of the Civet Cat destroyes the skin of the Panther: and the skin of a Wolf corrodes the skin of a Lamb: And some of these do not do it by way of a corporeall contact, but also sometimes by their very sound. So a drum made of the skin of a Wolf, makes a drum made of a Lamb skin not to sound. Also a drum made of the skin of the fish called Rotchet, drives away all creeping things, at what distance soever the sound of it is heard: and the strings of an instrument made of the guts  of a Wolf, and being strained  upon a Harp, or Lute with strings made of sheeps guts, will make no harmony.
It is manifest that all things inferiour are subject to the superiour, and after a manner (as saith Proclus) they are one in the other, viz in inferiour are superiour, and in superiour are inferiour: so in the Heaven are things Terrestriall, but as in their cause, and in a Celestiall manner; and in the Earth are things Celestiall, but after a Terrestriall manner, as in an effect. So we say that there be here certain things which are Solary, and certain which are Lunary, in which the Sun, and Moon make a strong impression of their vertue. Whence it is that these kind of things receive more operations, and properties, like to those of the Stars, & Signes which they are under: So we know that Solary things respect the heart, & head, by reason that Leo is the house of the Sun, and Aries the exaltation of the Sun: so things under Mars are good for the head, and testicles, by reason of Aries, and Scorpio. Hence they whose senses faile, and heads ake  by reason of drunkenness, if they put their testicles into cold Water, or wash them with Vinegar, find present help. But in reference to these it is necessary to know how mans body is distributed to Planets, & Signes. Know therefore that according to the doctrine of the Arabians, the Sun rules over the brain, heart, the thigh, the marrow, the right eye, and the spirit; also the tongue, the mouth, and the rest of the Organs of the senses, as well internall as externall; also the hands, feet, legs, nerves, and the power of imagination. That Mercury rules over the spleen, stomack, bladder, womb, and right ear, as also the faculty of the common sense. That Saturn rules over the liver and fleshy part of the stomack. That Jupiter over the belly, and navill, whence it is written by the Ancients, that the effigies of a navil  was laid up in the temple of Jupiter Hammon. Also some attribute to him the ribs, breast, bowels, blood, arms, and the right hand, and left ear, and the powers natural. And some set Mars over the blood, and veins, the kidnies, the bag of the gall, the buttocks, the back, motion of the sperm, and the irascible power. Again they set Venus over the kidnies, the testicles, the privities, the womb, the seed, and concupiscible power; as also the flesh, fat, belly, breast, navill, and all such parts as server to venerall  acts, also the Os sacrum, the back bone, and loins; as also the head, mouth, with which they give a kiss, as a token of love. Now the Moon, although she may challenge the whole body, and every member thereof according to the variety of the Signes: yet more particularly they ascribe to her the brain, lungs, marrow of the back bone, the stomack, the menstrues, and all other excrements, and the left eye, as also the power of increasing. But Hermes saith, That there are seven holes in the head of an Animall, distributed to the seven Planets, viz the right ear to Saturne, the left to Jupiter, the right nostrell  to Mars, the left to Venus, the right eye to the Sun, the left to the Moon, and the mouth to Mercury. The severall Signes also of the Zodiack take care of their members. So Aries governs the head, and face, Taurus the neck, Gemini the armes, and shoulders, Cancer the breast, lungs, stomack, and armes, Leo heart, stomack, liver, and back, Virgo the bowels, and bottome of the stomack, Libra the kidnies, thighs, and buttocks, Scorpius  the genitals, the privities, and womb, Sagittarius the thigh, and groins, Capricornus the knees, Aquarius the legs and shins, Pisces the feet. And as the triplicities of these Signes answer one the other, and agree in Celestials, so also they agree in the members, which is sufficiently manifest by experience, because with the coldness of the feet, the belly, and breast are affected, which members answer the same triplicity; whence it is, if a medicine be applyed to the one, it helps the other, as by the warming of the feet, the pain of the belly ceaseth. Remember therefore this order, and know, that things which are under any one of the Planets, have a certain particular aspect, or inclination to those members that are attributed to that Planet, and especially to the houses, and exaltations thereof. For the rest of the dignities, as those triplicities, and markes, and face, are of litle account in this; upon this account therefore Piony, Balme, Clove-gilliflowers, Citron-pils, sweet Marjoram, Cynnamon, Saffron, Lignum Aloes, Frankincense, Amber, Musk, and Myrrh help the head, and heart; by reason of sol, Aries, and Leo: so doth Rib-wort, the Hearb  of Mars, help the head, and testicles by reason of Aries, and Scorpio: and so of the rest. Also all things under Saturne conduce to sadness, and melancholly; those under Jupiter to mirth, and honour; those under Mars to boldness, contention, and anger; those under the Sun to glory, victory and courage; those under Venus to love, lust, and concupiscence; those under Mercury to Eloquence; those under the Moon to a common life. Also all the actions, and dispositions of men are distributed according to the Planets. For Saturne governes old men, Monkes, melancholly  men, and hid treasures; and those things which are obtained with long journies, and difficulty; but Jupiter, those that are Religious, Prelates, Kings, and Dukes, and such kind of gains that are got lawfully: Mars rules over Barbers, Chirurgeons, Physitians, Sergeants, Executioners, Butchers, all that make fires, Bakers, Souldiers, who are every where called Martial men. Also do the other Stars signifie their office, as they are described in the books of Astrologers.
Now it is very hard to know, what Star, or Signe every thing is under: yet it is known through the imitation of their rayes, or motion, or figure of the superiours. Also some of them are known by their colours and odours, also some by the effects of their operations, answering to some Stars. So then Solary things, or things under the power of the Sun are, amongst Elements, the lucid flame; in the humours, the purer blood, and spirit of life; amongst tasts, that which is quick, mixed with sweetness. Amongst Metals, Gold by reason of its splendor, and its receiving that from the Sun which makes it cordiall. And amongst stones, they which resemble the rayes of the Sun by their golden sparklings, as doth the glittering stone Aetites which hath power against the Falling-sickness, and poisons: so also the stone, which is called the eye of the Sun, being of a figure like to the Apple of the eye, from the middle whereof shines forth a ray, it comforts the brain, and strengthens the sight; So the Carbuncle which shines by night, hath a vertue against all aiery, and vaporous poison: so the Chrysolite stone is of a light green colour, in which, when it is held against the Sun, there shines forth a golden Star; and this comforts those parts that serve for breathing, & helps those that be Asthmaticall, and if it be bored through, and the hole filled with the Mane of an Asse, and bound to the left arme, it drives away idle imaginations, and melancholy fears, and puts away foolishness: So the stone called Iris, which is like Crystall in colour, being often found with six corners, when under some roof part of it is held against the rayes of the Sun, and the other part is held in the shadow, it gathers the rayes of the Sun into it self, which, whilest it sends them forth, by way of reflection, makes a Rain-bow  appear on the opposite wall. Also the Stone Heliotropion  green like the Jasper, or Emrald, beset with red specks, makes a man constant, renowned, and famous, also it conduceth to long life: And the vertue of it indeed is most wonderfull upon the beams of the Sun, which it is said to turn into blood (i.e.) to appear of the colour of blood, as if the Sun were eclypsed, viz When it is joyned to the juice of a Hearb  of the same name, and be put into a vessell of Water: There is also another vertue of it more wonderfull, and that is upon the eyes of men, whose sight it doth so dim, and dazel, that it doth not suffer him that carries it to see it, & this it doth not do without the help of the Hearb  of the same name, which also is called Heliotropium, '(i.e.) following the Sun. These vertues doth Albertus Magnus, and William of Paris confirm in their writings. The Hyacinth also hath a vertue from the Sun against poisons, and pestiferous vapours; it makes him that carries it to be safe, and acceptable; it conduceth also to riches, and wit, it strengthens the heart; being held in the mouth, it doth wonderfully cheer up the mind. Also there is the stone Pyrophylus, of a red mixture, which Albertus Magnus saith Æsculapius, makes mention of in one of his Epistles unto Octavius Augustus, saying, that there is a certain poison so wonderfull cold, which preserves the heart of man being taken out from burning, so that if for any time it be put into the Fire, it is turned into a stone, and this is that stone which is called Pyrophylus, from the fire. It hath a wonderfull vertue against poison, and it makes him that carries it, to be renowned and dreadfull to his enemies. But above all, that stone is most Solary, which Apollonius is reported to have found, and which is called Pantaura, which draws other stones to it, as the Loadstone doth Iron, most powerfull against all poisons; it is called by some Pantherus, because it is spotted like the beast called the Panther. It is therefore also called Pantochras, because it contains all colours. Aaron cals it Evanthum. There are also other Solary stones, as the Topazius, Chrysopassus, the Rubine, and Balagius. So also is Auripigmentum, and things of a golden colour, and very lucid. Amongst plants also and trees, those are Solary, which turn towards the Sun, as the Marygold, and those which fold in their leaves when the Sun is neer upon setting, but when it riseth unfold their leaves by little and little. The Lote-tree also is Solary, as is manifest by the figure of the fruit & leaves. So also Piony, Sallendine, Balme, Ginger, Gentian, Dittany, & Vervin, which is of use in prophecying, and expiations, as also driving away evill spirits. The Bay-tree also is consecrated to Phoebus, so is the Cedar, the Palm tree, the ash, the Ivie, and Vine, and whatsoever repell poisons, and lightnings, and those things which never fear the extremities of the Winter. Solary also are Mint, Mastick, Zedoary, Saffron, Balsome, Amber, Musk, Yellow honey, Lignum aloes, Cloves, Cinnamon, Calamus, Aromaticus, Pepper, Frankincense, sweet Marjoram, also Libanotis, which Orpheus cals the sweet perfume of the Sun. Amongst Animals those are Solary which are magnanimous, couragious, ambitious of victory, and renown: as the Lyon, King of beasts, the Crocodile, the spotted Wolf, the Ram, the Boar, the Bull, King of the herd, which was by the Egyptians at Heliopolis dedicated to the Sun, which they called Verites; and an Ox was consecrated to Apis in Memphi, and in Herminthus a Bull by the name of Pathis. The Wolf also was consecrated to Apollo, and Latona. Also the beast called Baboon is Solary, which twelve times in a day, viz every hour barks, and in time of Equinoctium  pisseth  twelve times every hour: the same also it doth in the night, whence the Egyptians did Engrave him upon their Fountains. Also amongst birds these are Solary, The Phoenix, being but one of that kind, and the Eagle, the Queen of birds, also the Vulture, the Swan, and those which sing at the rising Sun, and as it were call upon it to rise, as the Cock, Crow, also the Hawk, which because it in the Divinity of the Egyptians is an emblem of the spirit, and light, is by Porphyrius  reckoned amongst the Solary birds. Moreover, all such things as have some resemblance of the works of the Sun, as Worms shining in the night, and the Betle, which is a creature that lies under Cow-dung, also according to Appious interpretation, such whose eyes are changed according to the course of the Sun, are accounted Solary, and those things which come of them. And amongst fish, the Sea Calf is chiefly Solary, who doth resist lightning, also shell fish, and the fish called Pulmo, both which shine in the night, and the fish called Stella  for his parching heat, and the fish called Strombi, that follow their King, and Margari, which also have a King, and being dryed, are hardened into a stone of a golden colour.
These things are Lunary, amongst the Elements, viz the Earth, then the Water, as well that of the Sea, as of the Rivers, and all moist things, as the moisture of Trees, and Animals, especially they which are White, as the Whites of Eggs, fat, sweat, flegme, and the superfluities of bodies. Amongst tasts, salt, and insipid; amongst Metals, Silver; amongst stones, Crystall, the Silver Marcasite, and all those stones that are White, and Green. Also the stone Selenites (i.e.) Lunary, shining from a white body, with a yellow brightness, imitating the motion of the Moon, having in it the figure of the Moon which daily increaseth, or decreaseth as doth the Moon. Also Pearls, which are generated in shels  of fishes from the droppings of Water, also the Berill. Amongst Plants and Trees, these are Lunary, as the Selenotropion, which turns towards the Moon, as doth the Heliotropion towards the Sun, and the Palme tree sends forth a bough at every rising of the Moon; Hyssope also, and Rosemary, Agnus Castu, and the Olive-tree, are Lunary. Also the Hearb  Chinosta, which increaseth, and decreaseth with the Moon, viz in substance, and number of leaves, not only in Sap, and vertue, which indeed is in some sort common to all Plants, except Onions, which are under the influence of Mars, which have contrary properties; As amongst flying things the Saturnine bird, called a Quaile is a great enemy to the Moon and Sun. Lunary Animals are such as delight to be in mans company, and such as do naturally excell in love, or hatred, as all kinds of Dogs: The Chameleon also is Lunary, which alwaies assumes a colour according to the variety of the colour of the object: as the Moon changeth her nature according to the variety of the Signe which it is found in. Lunary also are Swine, Hinds, Goats, and all Animals whatsoever, that observe, and imitate the motion of the Moon: As the Baboon, and Panther, which is said to have a spot upon her shoulder like the Moon, increasing into a roundness, and having horns that bend inwards. Cats also are Lunary, whose eyes become greater or less, according to the course of the Moon: and those things which are of like nature, as Menstruous blood, of which are made wonderfull and strange things by Magicians; The Civet-Cat also changing her sex, being obnoxious to divers Sorceries, and all Animals that live in water as well as on land: as Otters, and such as prey upon fish. Also all Monstrous beasts, such as without any manifest seed are equivocally generated, as Mice, which sometimes are generated by Coition, sometimes of the putrefaction of the Earth. Amongst fowle, Geese, Ducks, Didoppers, and all kind of watery fowl as prey upon fish, as the Heron, and those that are equivocally produced, as Wasps of the Carkases  of horses: Bees of the putrefaction of Cows, small Flies of putrefied wine, and Betles  of the flesh of Asses; but most Lunary of all is the two-horned Betle, horned after the manner of a Bull: which digs under Cow-dung, and there remaines for the space of twenty eight daies, in which time the Moon measures the whole Zodiack, and in the twenty ninth day, when it thinks there will be a conjunction of their brightness, it opens the dung and casts it into Water, from whence then come Betles. Amongst fish these are Lunary, Ælurus, whose eyes are changed according to the course of the Moon, and whatsoever observes the motion of the Moon, as the Tortoise, the Echeneis, Crabs, Oisters, Cockles, and Frogs.
Saturnine things, amongst Elements, are Earth, and also Water: amongst humors, black Choller  that is moist, as well natural, as adventitious, adust Choller  excepted. Amongst tasts, soure, tart, and dead. Amongst Metals, Lead, and Gold, by reason of its weight, and the golden Marcasite. Amongst stones, the Onix, the Ziazaa, the Camonius, the Saphir, the brown Jasper, the Chalcedon, the Loadstone, and all dark, weighty, earthy things. Amongst Plants, and Trees the Daffodill, Dragon-wort, Rue, Cummin, Hellebor, the tree from whence Benzoine comes, Mandrake, Opium, and those things which stupifie, and those things which are never sown, and never bear fruit, and those which bring forth berries of a dark colour, and black fruit, as the black Fig-tree, the Pine-tree, the Cypress-tree, and a certain tree used at burials, which never springs afresh with berries, rough, of a bitter tast, of a strong smell, of a black shadow, yielding a most sharp pitch, bearing a most unprofitable fruit, never dies with age, deadly, dedicated to Pluto, as is the Hearb  pas-flower, with which they were wont Anciently to strow the graves before they put the dead bodies into them, wherefore it was lawfull to make their Garlands at feasts with all Hearbs, and Flowers besides pas-flowers, because it was mournfull, and not conducing to mirth. Also all creeping Animals, living apart, and solitary, nightly, sad, contemplative, dull, covetous, fearfull, melancholly, that take much pains, slow, that feed grosly, and such as eat their young. Of these kinds therefore are the Ape, the Cat, the Hog, the Mule, the Camel, the Bear, the Mole, the Asses, the Wolf, the Hare, the Dragon, the Basilisk, the Toad, all Serpents, and creeping things, Scorpions, Pismires, and such things as proceed from putrefaction in the Earth, in Water, or in the ruines of houses, as Mice, and many sorts of Vermin. Amongst birds those are Saturnine, which have long necks, and harsh voices, as Cranes, Estriches, and Peacocks, which are dedicated to Saturn, and Juno. Also the scrich-Owle, the horn-Owle, the Bat, the Lapwing, the Crow, the Quaile, which is the most envious bird of all. Amongst fishes, the Eel, living apart from all other fish; the Lamprey, the Dog-fish, which devours her young, also the Tortoise, Oisters, Cockles, to which may be added Sea-spunges, and all such things as come of them.
Things under Jupiter, amongst Elements, are the Aire: amongst humors, blood, and the spirit of life, also all things which respect the encrease, nourishment, and vegetation of the life. Amongst tasts  such as are sweet, and pleasant. Amongst Metals, Tin, Silver, and Gold, by reason of their temperateness: Amongst stones, the Hyacinth, Beril, Saphir, ', the Emrald, green Jasper, and  <aiery colours>: Amongst Plants and Trees, Sea-green, Garden Basil, Bugloss, Mace, Spike, Mints, Mastick, Elicampane, the Violet, Darnell, Henbane, the Poplar tree, and those which are called lucky trees, as the Oke, the tree æsculus  which is like an Oke  but much bigger, the Holm tree, the Beech tree, the Hasle  tree, the Service tree, the white Fig tree, the Pear tree, the Apple tree, the Vine, the Plum tree, the Ash, the Dog-tree, and the Olive tree, and also Oile. Also all manner of Corn, as Barley, Wheat, also Raisins, Licorish, Sugar, and all such things whose sweetness is manifest, and subtile, partaking somewhat of an astringent, and sharp tast, as are Nuts, Almonds, Pine-apples, Filberds, Pistake Nuts, roots of Peony, Mirabolaus, Rhubarb, and Manna, Orpheus adds Storax. Amongst Animals such as have some stateliness, and wisdom in them, and those which are mild, well trained up, and of good dispositions, as the Hart and Elephant, and those which are gentle, as Sheep and Lambs: Amongst birds, those that are of a temperate complexion, as Hens, together with the Yolk of their Eggs. Also the Partridge, the Pheasant, the Swallow, the Pellican, the Cuckow, the Stork, birds given to a kind of devotion which are Emblemes of gratitude. The Eagle is dedicated to Jupiter, she is the Ensigne of Emperours, and an Embleme of Justice, and Clemency. Amongst fish, the Dolphin, the fish called Anchia, the Sheath fish, by reason of his devoutness.
These things are Martiall, amongst Elements, Fire, together with all adust, and sharp things: Amongst humours, Choller; also bitter tasts, tart, and burning the tongue, and causing tears: Amongst Metals, Iron, and red Brass; and all fiery, red, and sulphureous things: Amongst Stones the Diamond, Loadstone, the Blood-stone, the Jasper, the stone that consists of divers kinds, and the Amethist. Amongst Plants, and Trees, Hellebor, Garlick, Euphorbium, Cartabana, Armoniack, Radish, the Laurell, Wolfs-bane, Scammony, and all such as are poysonous, by reason of too much heat, and those which are beset round about with prickles, or by touching the skin, burn it, prick it, or make it swell, as Cardis, the Nettle, Crow-foot, and such as being eaten cause tears, as Onyons, Ascolonia, Leeks, Mustardseed, and all thorny Trees, and the Dog-tree, which is dedicated to Mars. And all such Animals as are warlike, ravenous, bold, and of clear fancy, as the Horse, Mule, Goat, Kid, Wolf, Libard, the wild Ass; Serpents also, and Dragons full of displeasure and poyson; also all such as are offensive to men, as Gnats, Flies, Baboon, by reason of his anger. All birds that are ravenous, devour flesh, break bones, as the Eagle, the Faulcon, the Hawk, the Vultur; and those which are called the fatall Birds, as the Horn-Owl, the Scrich-Owl, Castrels, Kites, and such as are hungry, and ravenous, and such as make a noise in their swallowing, as Crows, Daws, the Pie, which above all the rest is dedicated to Mars. And amongst Fishes, the Pike, the Barbell, the Fork-fish, the Fish that hath horns like a Ram, the Sturgeon, the Glacus, all which are great devourers, and ravenous.
These things are under Venus, amongst Elements, Aire, and Water; amongst humours, Flegm, with Blood, Spirit, and Seed; amongst tasts, those which are sweet, unctuous, and delectable; amongst Metals, Silver, and Brass, both yellow, and red; amongst Stones, the Berill, Chrysolite, Emrald, Saphir, green Jasper, Corneola, the stone Aetites, the Lazull  stone, Corall, and all of a fair, various, white, and green Colour; amongst Plants and Trees the Vervin, Violet, Maidenhaire, Valerian, which by the Arabian is called Phu; also Thyme, the gum Ladanum, Amber-grise, Musk, Sanders, Coriander, and all sweet perfumes, and delightfull, and sweet fruits, as sweet Pears, Figs, Pomegranats, which the Poets say was, in Cyprus, first sown by Venus. Also the Rose of Lucifer was dedicated to her, also the Myrtle tree of Hesperus. Moreover all luxurious, delicious Animals, and of a strong love, as Dogs, Conies, stinking Sheep, and Goats, both female, and male, which generates sooner then any other Animall, for they say that he couples after the seventh day of his being brought forth; also the Bull for his disdain, and the Calf for his wantonness. Amongst birds the Swan, the Wagtail, the Swallow, the Pellican, the Burgander, which are very loving to their yong. Also the Crow, and Pigeon, which is dedicated to Venus, and the Turtle, one whereof was Commanded to be offered at the purification, after bringing forth. The Sparrow also was dedicated to Venus, which was Commanded in the Law to be used in the purification, after the Leprosie, a martiall disease, then which nothing was of more force to resist it. Also the Egyptians called the Eagle Venus, because she is prone to Venery, for after she hath been trod thirteen times a day, if the Male call her, she runs to him again. Amongst fishes, these are Venereall, the lustfull Pilchards, the letcherous  Gilthead, the Whiting for her love to her yong, Crab fighting for his Mate, and Tithymallus for its fragrance, and sweet smell.
Things under Mercury are these; amongst Elements, Water, although it moves all things indistinctly; amongst humors, those especially which are mixed, as also the Animall spirit; amongst tasts  those that are various, strange, and mixed: amongst Metals, Quick-silver, Tin, the Slver Marcasite; amongst stones, the Emrald, Achates, red Marble, Topaze, and those which are of divers colours, and various figures naturally, & those that are artificiall, as glass, & those which have a colour mixed with yellow, and green. Amongst Plants, and Trees, the Hazle, Five-leaved-grass, the Hearb  Mercury, Fumitary, Pimpernell, Marjoram, Parsly, and such as have shorter and less leaves, being compounded of mixed natures, and divers colours. Animals also, that are of quick sence, ingenious, strong, inconstant, swift, and such as become easily acquainted with men, as Dogs, Apes, Foxes, Weesels, the Hart, and Mule; and all Animals that are of both sexes, and those which can change their Sex, as the Hare, Civet-Cat, and such like. Amongst birds, those which are naturally witty, melodious, and inconstant, as the Linet, Nightingale, Blackbird, Thrush, Lark, the Gnat-sapper, the bird Calandra, the Parret, the Pie, the Bird Ibis, the bird Porphyrio, the black Betle  with one horn. And amongst fish, the fish called Trochius, which goes into himself, also Pourcontrell for deceitfulness, and changeableness, and the Fork fish for its industry; the Mullet also that shakes off the bait on the hook with his taile.
Moreover whatsoever is found in the whole world is made according to the governments of the Planets, and accordingly receives its vertue. So in Fire the enlivening light thereof is under the government of the Sun, the heat of it under Mars, in the Earth, the various superficies thereof under the Moon, and Mercury; and the starry Heaven, the whole mass of it under Saturne, but in the middle Elements, Aire is under Jupiter, and Water the Moon, but being mixed are under Mercury, and Venus. In like manner naturall active causes observe the Sun, the matter the Moon, the fruitfulness of active causes Jupiter, the fruitfullness of the matter, Venus, the sudden effecting of any thing, Mars, and Mercury, that for his vehemency, this for his dexterity, and manifold vertue: But the permanent continuation of all things is ascribed to Saturne. Also amongst Vegetables, every thing that bears fruit is from Jupiter, and every thing that bears Flowers is from Venus, all Seed, and Bark is from Mercury, and all roots from Saturne, and all Wood from Mars, and leaves from the Moon. Wherefore, all that bring forth fruit, and not Flowers, are of Saturne and Jupiter, but they that bring forth Flowers, and Seed, and not fruit, are of Venus, and Mercury; These which are brought forth of their own accord without Seed, are of the Moon, and Saturn; All beauty is from Venus, all strength from Mars, and every Planet rules, and disposeth that which is like to it. Also in stones, their weight, Clamminess, and Sliptickness is of Saturne, their use, and temperament of Jupiter, their hardness from Mars, their life from the Sun, their beauty and fairness from Venus, their occult vertue from Mercury, and their common use from the Moon.
Moreover the whole Orb of the Earth is distributed by Kingdoms, and Provinces to the Planets, and Signes: For Macedonia, Thracia, Illyria, Arriana, Gordiana, (many of which countries are in the lesser Asia) are under Saturne with Capricorn; but with Aquarius, under him are the Sauromatian Country, Oxiana, Sogdiana, Arabia, Phazania, Media and Æthiopia, which Countries for the most part belong to the more inward Asia. Under Jupiter with Sagittarius are Tuscana, Celtica, Spaine, and happy Arabia: under him with Pisces, are Lycia, Lydia, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Paphlagonia, Nasamonia, and Lybia. Mars with Aries governs Britany, France, Germany, Bastarnia, the lower parts of Syria, Idumea, and Judea: with Scorpio, he rules Syria, Comagena, Cappadocia, Metagonium, Mauritania, and Getulia. The Sun with Leo governs Italy, Apulia, Sicilia, Phenicia, Chaldea, & the Orchenians. Venus with Taurus governs the Isles Cyclades, the Seas of litle Asia, Cyprus, Parthia, Media, Persia: but with Libra she commands the people of the Island Bractia, of Caspia, of Seres, of Thebais, of Oasis, and of Troglodys. Mercury with Gemini, rules Hircania, Armenia, Mantiana, Cyrenaica, Marmarica, and the lower Egypt: but with Virgo, Greece, Achaia, Creta, Babylon, Mesopotamia, Assyria, and Ela, whence they of that place are in Scripture called Elamites. The Moon with Cancer governs Bithivia, Phrygia, Colchica, Numidia, Africa, Carthage, and all Carchedonia. These we have in this manner gathered from Ptolemies  opinion, to which according to the writings of other Astrologers many more may be added. But he which knows how to compare these divisions of Provinces according to the divisions of the Stars, with the Ministery  of the ruling Intelligencies, and blessings of the Tribes of Israel, the lots of the Apostles, and typicall seales of the sacred Scripture, shall be able to obtain great and propheticall oracles concerning every Region, of things to come.
The like consideration is to be had in all things concerning the figures of the fixed Stars: so they will have the Terrestiall  Ram to be under the rule of the Celestiall Aries: and the Terrestiall Bull, and Ox to be under the Celestiall Taurus. So also that Cancer should rule over Crabs, and Leo over Lyons: Virgo over Virgins, and Scorpio over Scorpions. Capricorn over Goats. Sagittarius over Horses, and Pisces over Fishes. Also the Celestiall Ursa over Bears, Hydra over Serpents, and the Dog-star over Dogs, and so of the rest. Now Apuleius distributes certain and peculiar Hearbs  to the Signes, and Planets, viz To Aries the Hearb  Sange, to Taurus Vervine  that growes straight, to Gemini Vervine  that growes bending, to Cancer Comfrey, to Leo Sowbread, to Virgo Calamint, to Libra Mug-wort, to Scorpio Scorpion-grass, to Sagittarius Pimpernell, to Capricorn the Dock, to Aquarius Dragon-wort, to Pisces Hart-wort. And to the Planets these, viz to Saturne Sen-green, to Jupiter Agrimony, to Mars Sulphur-wort, to the Sun Marygold, to Venus Wound-wort, to Mercury Mulleine, to the Moon, Peony. But Hermes, whom Albertus follows, distributes to the Planets these, viz to Saturne the Daffodill, to Jupiter Henbane, to Mars Rib-wort, to the Sun Knotgrass, to Venus Vervine, to Mercury Cinquefoile, to the Moon, Goos-foot. We also know by experience that Asparagus is under Aries, and Garden-basill under Scorpio; For of the shavings of Rams-horn sowed, comes forth Asparagus, and Garden Basill rubbed betwixt two stones, produceth Scorpions. Moreover I will according to the doctrine of Hermes, and Thebit reckon up some of the more eminent Stars, whereof the first is called the head of Algol, and amongst stones, rules over the Diamond, amongst Plants, black Hellebor, and Mugwort. The second are the Pleiades, or seven Stars, which amongst stones, rule over Crystall, and the stone Diodocus; amongst Plants, the Hearb  Diacedon, and Frankincense, and Fennill: and amongst Metals, Quick-silver. The third is the Star Aldeboran, which hath under it, amongst stones, the Carbuncle, and Ruby: amongst Plants, the Milky Thistle, and Matry-silva. The fourth is called the Goat-Star, which rules, amongst stones, the Saphir, amongst Plants, Horehound, Mint, Mugwort, and Mandrake. The fifth is called the great Dog-star, which amongst stones, rules over the Berill: amongst Plants, Savin, Mugwort and Dragonwort: and amongst Animals the tongue of a Snake. The sixth is called the lesser Dog-star, and, amongst stones, rules over Achates: amongst Plants the Flowers of Marigold, and Penyroial. The seventh is called the Heart of the Lyon, which amongst stones, rules over the Granate; amongst Plants, Sallendine, Mugwort, and Mastick. The eighth is the Taile of the lesser Bear, which amongst stones, rules over the Loadstone, amongst Hearbs, Succory, whose leaves, and Flowers turn towards the North, also Mugwort, and the flowers of Perwinckle; and amongst Animals the tooth of a Wolf. The ninth is called the Wing of the Crow, under which, amongst stones, are such stones as are of the Colour of the black Onyx stone: amongst Plants the Bur, Quadraginus, Henbane, and Comfrey; and amongst Animals the tongue of a Frog. The tenth is called Spica, which hath under it, amongst stones, the Emrald: amongst Plants, Sage, Trifoile, Perwinkle, Mugwort, and Mandrake. The eleventh is called Alchamech, which amongst stones, rules over the Jasper: amongst Plants the Plantain. The twelfth is called Elpheia, under this, amongst stones, is the Topaze; amongst Plants, Rosemary, Trifoile, and Ivy. The thirteenth is called the Heart of the Scorpion, under which, amongst stones, is the Sardonius, and Amethist; amongst Plants long Aristolochy, and Saffron. The fourteenth is the Falling Vultur, under which, amongst stones, is the Chrysolite: amongst Plants Succory, and Fumitary. The fifteenth is the Taile of Capricorn under which, amongst stones, is the Chalcedone: amongst Plants, Majoram, Mugwort, and Nip, and the root of Mandrake.
Moreover this we must know, that every stone, or Plant, or Animall, or any other thing, is not governed by one Star alone, but many of them receive influence, not separated, but conjoyned, from many Stars. So amongst stones, the Chalcedony is under Saturne, and Mercury, together with the Taile of Scorpion, and Capricorn. The Saphir  under Jupiter, Saturne, and the Star Alhajoth; Tutia is under Jupiter, and the Sun and Moon, the Emrald  under Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury, and the Star Spica. The Amethyst, as saith Hermes, is under Mars, Jupiter, and the Heart of the Scorpion. The Jasper, which is of divers kinds is under Mars, Jupiter, and the Star Alchamech, the Chrysolite is under the Sun, Venus, and Mercury, as also under the Star which is called the falling Vultur; the Topaze under the Sun, and the Star Elpheia: the Diamond under Mars, and the Head of Algol. In like manner amongst Vegetables, the Hearb  Dragon is under Saturne, and the Celestiall Dragon, Mastick, and Mints, are under Jupiter, and the Sun; but Mastick is also under the Heart of the Lyon, and Mint under the Goat star: Hellebor is dedicated to Mars, and the Head of Algol, Mosse, and Sanders, to the Sun, and Venus: Coriander to Venus, and Saturne. Amongst Animals, the Sea Calf is under the Sun, and Jupiter; The Fox, and Ape under Saturne, and Mercury: and Domesticall Dogs under Mercury, and the Moon. And thus we have shewed more things in these inferiours by their superiours.
All Stars have their peculiar Natures, properties, and conditions, the Seals and Characters whereof they produce through their rayes, even in these inferiour things, viz in Elements, in Stones, in Plants, in Animals, and their members, whence every thing receives from an harmonious disposition, and from its Star shining upon it, some particular Seal, or Character stampt upon it, which is the significator of that Star, or harmony, conteining in it a peculiar vertue, differing from other vertues of the same matter, both generically, specifically, and numerically. Every thing therefore hath its Character pressed upon it by its Star for some particular effect, especially by that Star which doth principally govern it: And these Characters contain, and retain in them the peculiar natures, vertues, and roots of their Stars, and produce the like operations upon other things, on which they are reflected, and stir up, and help the influencies of their Stars, whether they be Planets, or fixed Stars, and figures, and Celestiall signs, viz as oft as they shall be made in a fit matter, and in their due, and accustomed times. Which ancient wise men considering, such as laboured much in the finding out of the occult properties of things, did set down in writing the images of the Stars, their figures, Seals, Marks, Characters, such as nature her self did describe by the rayes of the Stars, in these inferiour bodies, some in stones, some in Plants, and joynts, and knots of boughs, and some in divers members of Animals. For the Bay-tree, the Lote-tree, and the Marygold  are Solary Plants, and in their roots, and knots being cut off, shew the Characters of the Sun, so also in the bone, and shoulderblades in Animals: whence there arose a spatulary kind of divining (i.e.) by the shoulder-blades, and in stones, and stony things the Characters, and images of Celestiall things are often found. But seeing that in so great a diversity of things there is not a traditionall knowledge, only in a few things, which humane understanding is able to reach: Therefore leaving those things which are to be found out in Plants, and Stones, and other things, as also, in the members of divers Animals, we shall limit our selves to mans nature only, which seeing it is the compleatest image of the whole universe, containing in it self the whole heavenly harmony, will without all doubt abundantly afford us the Seals, and Characters of all the Stars, and Celestiall Influencies, and those as the more efficacious, which are less differing from the Celestiall nature. But as the number of the Stars is known to God alone, so also their effects, and Seals upon these inferiour things: wherefore no humane intellect is able to attain to the knowledge of them. Whence very few of those things became known to us, which the ancient Philosophers, & Chyromancers  attained to, partly by reason, and partly by experience, and there be many things yet ly hid in the treasury of nture. We shall here in this place note some few Seals,and Characters of the Planets, such as the ancient Chyromancers  knew in the hands of men. These doth Julian call sacred, and divine letters, seeing that by them, according to the holy Scripture is the life of men writ in their hands. And there are in all Nations, and Languages alwaies the same, and like to them, and permanent; to which were added, and found out afterwards many more, as by the ancient, so by latter Chyromancers. And they that would know them must have recourse to their Volumes. It is sufficient here to shew from whence the Characters of Nature have their originall, and in what things they are to be enquired after.
Now if thou desirest to receive vertue from any part of the World, or from any Star, thou shalt (those things being used which belong to this Star) come under its peculiar influence, as Wood is fit to receive Flame, by reason of Sulphur, Pitch, and Oile. Nevertheless when thou dost to any one species of things, or individual, rightly apply many things, which are things of the same subject scattered amongst themselves, conformable to the same Idea, and Star, presently by this matter so opportunely fitted, a singular gift is infused by the Idea, by means of the soul of the world. I say opportunely fitted, viz under a harmony like to the harmony, which did infuse a certain vertue into the matter. For although things have some vertues, such as we speak of, yet those vertues do so ly  hid that there is seldom any effect produced by them: but as in a grain of Mustardseed, bruised, the sharpness which lay hid is stirred up: and as the heat of the fire doth make letters apparently seen, which before could not be read, that were writ with the juice of an Onion or milk: and letters wrote upon a stone with the fat of a Goat, and altogether unperceived, when the stone is put into Vinegar, appear and shew themselves. And as a blow with a stick stirs up the madness of a Dog, which before lay asleep, so doth the Celestiall harmony disclose vertues lying in the water, stirs them up, strengtheneth them, and makes them manifest, and as I may so say, produceth that into Act, which before was only in power, when things are rightly exposed to it in a Celestiall season. As for example; If thou dost desire to attract vertue from the Sun, and to seek those things that are Solary, amongst Vegetables, Plants, Metals, Stones, and Animals, these things are to be used, and taken chiefly, which in a Solary order are higher. For these are more available: So thou shalt draw a singular gift from the Sun through the beams thereof, being seasonably received together, and through the spirit of the world.
It is most evident, that in the inferiour nature all the powers of superior bodies are not found comprehended in any one thing, but are dispersed through many kinds of things amongst us: as there are many Solary things, whereof every one doth not contain all the vertues of the Sun: but some have some properties from the Sun, and others othersome. Wherefore it is sometimes necessary that there be mixtions in operations, that if a hundred or a thousand vertues of the Sun were dispersed through so many Plants, Animals, & the like, we may gather all these together, and bring them into one form, in which we shall see all the said vertues, being united, contained. Now there is a twofold vertue in commixtion, one, viz which was first planted in its parts, and is Celestiall, the other is obtained by a certain, and artificiall mixtion of things mixt amongst themselves, and of the mixtions of them according to certain proportions, such as agree with the heaven under a certain Constellation; And this vertue descends by a certain likeness, and aptness that is in things amongst themselves towards their superiours, and just as much as the following do by degrees correspond with them that go before, where the patient is fitly applyed to its agent. So from a certain composition of Hearbs, vapours, and such like, made according to naturall Philosophy, and Astronomy, there results a certain common form, endowed with many gifts of the Stars: as in the honey of Bees, that which is gathered out of the juice of innumerable Flowers, and brought into one form, contains the vertue of all, by a kind of divine, and admirable art of the Bees. Yet this is not to be less wondred at which Eudoxus Giudius reports of an artificiall kind of honey, which a certain Nation of Gyants  in Lybia knew how to make out of Flowers, and that very good, and not far inferiour to that of the Bees. For every mixtion, which consists of many severall things, is then most perfect, when it is so firmly compacted in all parts, that it becomes one, is every where firm to it self, and can hardly be dissipated: as we sometimes see stones, and divers bodies to be by a certain naturall power conglutinated, and united, that they seem to be wholly one thing: as we see two trees by grafting to become one, also Oisters  with stones by a certain occult vertue of nature, and there have been seen some Animals which have been turned into stones, and so united with the substance of the stone, that they seem to make one body, and that also homogeneous. So the tree Ebeny  is one while wood, and another while stone. When therefore any one makes a mixtion of many matters under the Celestiall influencies, then the variety of Celestiall actions on the one hand, and of naturall powers on the other hand, being joyned together doth indeed cause wonderfull thing, by ointments, by collyries, by fumes, and such like, which viz are read in the book of Chiramis, Archyta, Democritus, and Hermes, who is named Alchorat, and of many others.
Moreover we must know, that by how much the more noble the form of any thing is, by so much the more prone, and apt it is to receive, and powerfull to act. Then the vertues of things do then become wonderfull, viz when they are put to matters that are mixed, and prepared in fit seasons, to make them alive, by procuring life for them from the Stars, as also a sensible soul, as a more noble form. For there is so great a power in prepared matters which we see do then receive life, when a perfect mixtion of qualities seems to break the former contrariety. For so much the more perfect life things receive, by how much their temper is more remote from contrariety. Now the Heaven, as a prevalent cause doth from the beginning of every thing to be generated by the concoction, and perfect digestion of the matter, together with life, bestows Celestiall influences, and wonderfull gifts, according to the Capacity that is in that life, and sensible soul to receive more noble, and sublime vertues. For the Celestiall vertue doth otherwise lye asleep, as Sulphur kept from Flame, but in living bodies it doth alwaies burn, as kindled Sulphur, then by its vapour it fils all the places that are next to it; so certain wonderfull works are wrought, such as are read of in the book of Nemith, which is tituled a Book of the Laws of Pluto, because such kind of monstrous generations are not produced according to the Laws of Nature. For we know that of Worms are generated Gnats, of a Horse Waspes, of a Calf, and Ox Bees, of a Crab, his legs being taken of, and he buried in the ground, a Scorpion; of a Duck dryed into powder, and put into Water, are generated Frogs; but if it be baked in a Pie, and cut into pieces, and put into a moist place under the ground, Toads are generated of it: of the Hearb  Garden Basill bruised betwixt two stones, are generated Scorpions, and of the hairs of a menstrous Woman put under dung, are bred Serpents; and the hair of a Horse taile put into Water, receiveth life, and is turned into a pernicious Worm. And there is an art wherewith by a Hen sitting upon Eggs may be generated a form like to a man, which I have seen, & know how to make, which Magicians say hath in it wonderfull vertues, and this they call the true Mandrake. You must therefore know which, and what kind of matters are either of nature, or art, begun, or perfected, or compounded of more things, and what Celestiall influencies they are able to receive. For a Congruity of naturall things is sufficient for the receiving of influence from Celestiall; because when nothing doth hinder the Celestials to send forth their lights upon inferiours, they suffer no matter to be destitute of their vertue. Wherefore as much matter as is perfect, and pure, is not unfit to receive the Celestiall influence. For that is the binding and continuity of the matter to the soul of the world, which doth so daily flow in upon things naturall, and all things which nature hath prepared, that it is impossible that a prepared matter should not receive life, or a more noble form.
Platonists, together with Hermes, say, and Jarchus Brachmanus, and the Mecubals of the Hebrews confess, that all sublunary things are subject to generation, and corruption, and that also there are the same things in the Celestiall world, but after a Celestiall manner, as also in the intellectuall world, but in a far more perfect, and better fashion, and manner, but in the most perfect manner of all in the exemplary. And after this course, that every inferiour thing should in its kind answer its superiour, and through this the supream  it self, and receive from heaven that Celestiall power they call the quintessence, or the spirit of the world, or the middle nature, and from the intellectuall world a spirituall and enlivening vertue transcending all qualities whatsoever, and lastly from the exemplary or originall world, through the mediation of the other, according to their degree receive the originall power of the whole perfection. Hence every thing may be aptly reduced from these inferiours to the Stars, from the Stars to their Intelligencies, and from thence to the first cause it self; from the series, and order whereof whole Magick, and all occult Philosophy flowes: For every day some naturall thing is drawn by art, and some divine thing is drawn by nature, which the Egyptians seeing, called Nature a Magicianess, (i.e.) the very Magicall power it self, in the attracting of like by like, and of sutable things by sutable. Now such kind of attractions by the mutuall correspondency of things amongst themselves, of superiours with inferiours, the Grecians called συμπαθιαν. So the earth agrees with cold water, the water with moist Aire, the Aire with Fire, the Fire with the Heaven in water; neither is Fire mixed with water, but by Aire, nor the Aire with the Earth, but by water. So neither is the soul united to the body, but by the spirit, nor the understanding to the spirit but by the soul. So we see that when nature hath framed the body of an infant, by this very preparative she presently fetcheth the spirit from the Universe. This spirit is the instrument to obtain of God the understanding, and mind in the soul, and body, as in wood the dryness is fitted to receive oile, and the oile being imbibed is food for the Fire, the Fire is the vehiculum of light. By these examples you see how by some certain naturall, and artificiall preparations, we are in a capacity to receive certain Celestiall gifts from above. For stones, and Metals have a correspondency with Hearbs, Hearbs  with Animals, Animals with the Heavens, the Heavens with Intelligencies, and those with divine properties, and attributes, and with God himself, after whose image, and likness all things are created. Now the first Image of God is the world, of the world, man, of man, beasts, of beasts, the Zeophyton (i.e.) half Animall, and half Plant; of Zeophyton, plants, of plants, metals, of metals, stones. And again in things spirituall, the Plant agrees with a bruit  in Vegetation, a bruit  with a man in sense, man with an Angel in understanding, an Angell with God in immortality. Divinity is annexed to the mind, the mind to the intellect, the intellect to the intention, the intention to the imagination, the imagination to the senses, the senses at last to things. For this is the band, and continuity of nature, that all superior vertue doth flow through every inferiour with a long, and continued series, dispersing its rayes even to the very last things; and inferiours through their superiours, come to the very supream  of all. For so inferiours are successively joyned to their superiours, that there proceeds an influence from their head, the first cause, as a certain string stretched out, to the lowermost things of all, of which string if one end be touched, the whole doth presently shake, and such a touch doth sound to the other end, and at the motion of the inferiour, the superiour also is moved, to which the other doth answer, as strings in a Lute well tuned.
Magicians teach that Celestial gifts may through inferiors being conformable to superiors be drawn down by opportune influencies of the Heaven; and so also by these Celestial, the Celestial Angels, as they are servants of the Stars, may be procured, and conveyed to us. Iamblichus, Proclus, and Synesius, with the whole School of Platonists confirm, that not only Celestiall, and vitall, but also certain Intellectuall, Angelicall, and divine gifts may be received from above by some certain matters, having a naturall power of divinity (i.e.) which have a naturall correspondency with the superiors, being rightly received, and opportunely gathered together according to the rules of Naturall Philosophy, and Astronomy: And Mercurius Trismegistus writes, that an Image rightly made of certain proper things, appropriated to any one certain Angel, will presently be animated by that Angel. Of the same also Austin  makes mention in his eighth book De Civitate Dei. For this is the harmony of the world, that things supercelestiall be drawn down by the Celestiall, and the super-naturall  by naturall, because there is one operative vertue that is diffused through all kinds of things, by which vertue indeed, as manifest things are produced out of occult causes; so a Magician doth make use of things manifest, to draw forth things that are occult, viz through the rays of the Stars, through fumes, lights, sounds, and naturall things, which are agreeable to Celestiall: in which, besides corporeall qualities, there is a kind of reason, sense, and harmony, and incorporeall, and divine measures, and orders. So we read that the Ancients were wont often to receive some divine, and wonderfull thing by certain naturall things: so the stone that is bred in the Apple of the eye of a Civet Cat, held under the tongue of a man, is said to make him to divine, or prophesie: The same is Selenite, the Moon stone, reported to do, so they say that the Images of Gods may be called up by the stone called Anchitis, and that the Ghosts of the dead may be, being called up, kept up by the stone Synochitis. The like doth the Hearb  Aglauphotis do, which is called Marmorites, growing upon the Marbles of Arabia, as saith Pliny, and the which Magicians use. Also there is an Hearb  called Rheangelida, which Magicians drinking of, can prophesie. Moreover there are some Hearbs  by which the dead are raised to life; whence Xanthus the Historian tels, that with a certain Hearb  called Balus, a young Dragon being killed, was made alive again, also that by the same a certain man of Tillum, whom a Dragon killed, was restored to life: and Juba reports, that in Arabia a certain man was by a certain Hearb  restored to life. But whether or no any such things can be done indeed upon man by the vertue of Hearbs, or any other naturall thing, we shall discourse in the following Chapter. Now it is certain, and manifest that such things can be done upon other animals. So if flies, that are drowned, be put into warm ashes, they revive. And Bees being drowned, do in like manner recover life in the juice of the hearb Nip; and Eels being dead for want of water, if with their whole bodies they be put under mud in vineger, and the blood of a Vultur  being put to them, will all of them in a few dayes recover life. They say that if the fish Echeneis be cut into peices, and cast into the sea, the parts will within a little time come together, and live. Also we know that the Pellican  doth restore her yong  to life, being killed, with her own blood.
No man is ignorant that evill spirits, by evill, and prophane  Arts may be raised up as Psellus saith Sorcerers are wont to do, whom most detestable and abominable filthiness did follow, and accompany, such as were in times past in the sacrifices of Priapus, and in the worship of the Idoll which was called Panor, to whom they did sacrifice with their privy members  uncovered. Neither to these is that unlike (if it be true, and not a fable) which is read concerning the detestable heresy of old Church-men, and like to these are manifest in Witches and mischeivous  women, which wickednesses the foolish dotage of women is subject to fall into. By these, and such as these evill spirits are raised. As a wicked spirit spake once to Iohn  of one Cynops a Sorcerer; all the power, saith he, of Satan dwells there, and he is entred into a confederacy with all the principalities together, and likewise we, with him, and Cynops obeys us, and we again obey him. Again, on the contrary side, no man is ignorant that supercelestiall Angels or spirits may be gained by us through good works, a pure mind, secret prayers, devout humiliation, and the like. Let no man therefore doubt that in like manner by some certain matters of the world, the Gods of the world may be raised by us, or at least the ministring spirits, or servants of these Gods, and as Mercurius  saith, the airy spirits, not supercelestiall, much less higher. So we read that the antient  Priests made statues, and images, foretelling things to come, and infused into them the spirits of the stars, which were not kept there by constraint in some certain matters, but rejoycing  in them, viz as acknowledging such kinds of matter to be sutable  to them, they do alwaies and willingly abide in them, and speak, and do wonderfull things by them: no otherwise then evill spirits are wont to do, when they possess mens bodies.
WEE have spoken concerning the vertues, and wonderfull efficacy of naturall things. It remains now that we understand a thing of great wonderment: and it is a binding of men into love, or hatred, sickness or health, and such like. Also the binding of thieves, and robbers, that they cannot steale in any place; the binding of Merchants, that they cannot buy, or sell in any place; the binding of an army, that they cannot pass over any bound; the binding of ships, that no winds, though never so strong, shall be able to carry them out of the Haven. Also the binding of a mill, that it can by no force whatsoever be turned round: the binding of a Cisterne, or fountain, that the water cannot be drawn up out of them: The binding of the ground, that it cannot bring forth fruit: the binding of any place, that nothing can be built upon it: The binding of fire, that though it be never so strong, can burn no combustible thing that is put to it. Also the bindings of lightnings, and tempests, that they shall do no hurt. The binding of dogs, that they cannot bark. Also the binding of birds, and wild beasts, that they shall not be able to fly, or run away. And such like as these, which are scarce credible, yet often known by experience. Now there are such kind of bindings as these made by Sorceries, Collyries, Unguents, love potions, by binding to, and hanging up of things, by rings, by charmes, by strong imaginations, and passions, by images, and characters, by inchantments, and imprecations, by lights, by sound, by numbers, by words, and names, invocations, sacrifices, by swearing, conjuring, consecrations, devotions, and by divers superstitions, and observations, and such like.
And such as Apuleius tells of concerning Pamphila, that Sorceress, endeavouring to procure love; to whom Fotis a certain maid brought the haires of a goat (cut off from a bag or botle  made with the skin thereof) instead of Bæotius a young mans haires: Now she (saith he) being out of her wits for the young man, goeth up to the tyled rough, and in the upper part thereof makes a great hole open to all the orientall, and other aspects, and most fit for these her arts, and there privately worships, having before furnished her mournfull house with sutable furniture, with all kinds of spices, with plates of Iron with strange words engraven upon them, with sterns of ships that were cast away, and much lamented, and with divers members of buryed carkasses  cast abroad: here noses, and fingers, there the fleshy nailes of those that were hanged, and in another place the blood of them that were murdered, and their skulls mangled with the teeth of wild beasts; then she offers sacrifices (their inchanted entralls  lying panting), and sprinkles them with divers kinds of liquors; sometimes with fountain water, sometimes with cowes milk, sometimes with mountain honey, and mead: Then she ties those haires into knots, and layes them on the fire, with divers odours to be burnt. Then presently with an irresistible power of Magick, and blind force of the Gods, the bodies of those whose haires did smoke, and crash, assume the spirit of a man, and feel, and hear, and walk, and come whither the stink of their haire led them, and insteed of Bæotius the young man, come skipping, and leaping with joy, and love into the house. Austin  also reports, that he heard of some women Sorceresses, that were so versed in these kind of arts, that by giving cheese to men, they could presently turn them into working cattell, and the work being done, restored them into men again.
Now I will shew you what some of the Sorceries are, that by the example of these there may be a way opened for the consideration of the whole subject of them. Of these therefore the first is menstruous bloud, which, how much power it hath in Sorcery, we will now consider; for, as they say, if it comes over new wine, it makes it soure, and if it doth but touch the Vine it spoyles  it for ever, and by its very touch it makes all Plants, and Trees barren, and they that be newly set, to die; it burns up all the hearbs  in the garden, and makes fruit fall off from the Trees, it darkens the brightness of a looking glass, dulls the edges of knives, and razors, dims the beauty of Ivory, and makes Iron presently rusty, it makes brass rust, and smell very strong: it makes dogs mad, if they do but tast  of it, and if they being thus mad shall bite any one, that wound is incurable: it kils  whole hives of Bees, and drives them from the hives that are but touched with it, it makes linnen  black that are boyled, it makes Mares cast their foal if they do but touch it, and makes women miscarry if they be but smeared with it: it makes Asses barren as long as they eat of the corn that hath been touched with it. The ashes of menstruous clothes, if they be cast upon purple garments that are to be washed, change the colour of them, and takes away colours from flowers. They say that it drives away tertian, and quartane Agues, if it be put into the wooll of a black Ram, and tyed  up in a silver bracelet, as also if the soles of the patients feet be noynted  therewith, and especially if it be done by the woman her self, the patients not knowing of it; moreover it cures the fits of the falling sickness. But most especially it cures them that are affraid  of water, or drink after they are bitten with a mad dog, if onely a menstruous cloth be put under the cup. Besides, they report, that if menstruous women shall walk naked about the standing corn, they make all cankars, worms, beetles, flyes, and all hurtfull things fall off from the corn: but they must take heed that they do it before Sun rising, or else they will make the corn to wither. Also they say that they are able to expell hail, tempests, and lightnings, more of which Pliny makes mention of. Know this, that they are a greater poyson  if they happen in the decrease of the Moon, and yet much greater, if they happen betwixt the decrease, and change of the Moon: But if they happen in the Eclypse  of the Moon or Sun, they are an incurable poyson. But they are of greatest force of all, when they happen in the first years, even in the years of virginity, for if they do but touch the posts of the house there can no mischeif  take effect in it. Also they say that the threads of any garment touched therewith, cannot be burnt, and if they be cast into the fire, it will spread no further. Also it is said that the root of Peony being given with Castor, and smeared over with a menstruous cloth, cureth the falling sickness. Moreover if the stomack  of a Hart be burnt or rosted, and to it be put a perfuming made with a menstruous cloth, it will make crass-bows  useless for the killing of any game: The haires of a menstruous woman put under dung, breed Serpents: and if they be burnt, will drive away Serpents with their smell. So great a poysonous  force is in them, that they are poyson  to poysonous  creatures. There is also Hippomanes, which amongst Sorceries is not the least taken notice of, and it is a little venemous  piece of flesh as big as a fig, and black, which is in the forehead of a Colt newly foaled, which unless the Mare her self doth presently eat, she will never after love her foals, or let it suck. And for this cause they say there is a most wonderful power in it to procure love, if it be powdered, and drank in a cup with the blood of him that is in love. There is also another Sorcery, which is called by the same name, viz Hippomanes, viz a venemous  humour, issuing out of the share of a Mare what time she desires a horse, of which Virgill makes mention, when he sings
Apollonius also in his Argonauticks makes mention of the hearb  of Prometheus, which he saith groweth from corrupt blood dropping upon the earth, whilest the Vultur  was gnawing upon the liver of Prometheus upon the hill Caucasus. The flowre  of this hearb, he saith, is like Saffron, having a double stalk hanging out, one farther then the other the length of a cubit, the root under the earth, as flesh newly cut, sends forth a blackish juice as it were of a beech; with which, saith he, if any one shall after he hath performed his devotion to Proserpina, smear over his body, he cannot be hurt either with sword, or fire. Also Saxo Gramaticus  writes, that there was a certain man called Froton, who had a garment, which when he had put on he could not be hurt with the point or edge of any weapon. The civet Cat also abounds with Sorceries: for, as Pliny reports, the posts of a dore  being touched with her blood, the Arts of Juglers  and Sorcerers are so invallid, that the Gods cannot be called up, and will by no means be perswaded to talk with them. Also that they that are anoynted  with the ashes of the ankle bone of her left foot, being decocted with the blood of a Weesell  shall become odious to all. The same also is done with the eye, being decocted. Also it is said that the straight gut is administered against the injustice, and corruption of Princes, and great men in power, and for success of Petitions, and to conduce to ending of suits, and controversies, if any one hath never so little of it about him, and that if it be bound unto the left arm, it is such a present  charm, that if any man do but look upon a woman, it will make her follow him presently; and that the skin of her  forehead doth withstand bewitchings. They say also that the blood of a Basilisk, which they call the blood of Saturn, hath such great force in Sorcery, that it procures for him that carryes it about him, good success of his Petitions, from great men in power, and of his prayers from God, and also remedies of diseases, and grant of any priveledge. They say also that a tyck, if it be pulled out of the left eare of a dog, and if be it altogether black, hath great vertue in the prognostick of life, for if the sick party shall answer him that brought it in, who standing at his feet, & shall ask of him concerning his disease, there is certain hope of life, and that he shall dye, if he make no answer. They say also, that a stone that is bit with a mad dog hath power to cause discord, if it be put in drink, and that he shall not be barked at by dogs, that puts the tongue of a dog in his shooe  under his great toe, especially if the hearb  of the same name, viz houndstongue be joyned with it. And that a membrane of the secondines of a dog doth the same; and that dogs will shun him that hath a dogs heart. And Pliny reports that there is a red toad that lives in bryers, and brambles, and is full of Sorceries and doth wonderfull things: for the little bone which is in his left side, being cast into cold water, makes it presently very hot, by which also the rage of dogs is restrained, and their love is procured, if it be put in drink; and if it be bound to any one, it stirreth up lust. On the contrary, the litle bone which is on the right side, makes hot water cold, and that it can never be hot again, unless that be taken out, also it is said to cure quartanes if it be bound to the sick in a snakes skin, as also all other feavors, and restrain love, and lust. And that the spleen, and heart is an effectual remedy against the poisons of the said Toad. Thus much Pliny writes. Also it is said that the sword, with which a man is slain, hath wonderfull power in Sorceries: For if the snaffle of the bridle, or spurs be made of it, they say that with these any horse, though never so wild, may be tamed, and gentled: and that if a Horse should be shod with shooes  made with it, he would be most swift and fleet, and never, though never so hard rod, tire. But yet they will that some Characters, and names should be written upon it. They say also, if any man shall dip a sword, wherewith men were beheaded, in wine; and the sick drink thereof, he shall be cured of his quartane. They say also that a cup of liquor being made with the brains of a Bear, and drank out of the skull, shall make him that drinks it, to be as fierce, and as raging as a Bear, and think himself to be changed into a Bear, and judge all things he sees to be Bears, and so to continue in that madness, untill the force of that draught shall be dissolved, no other distemper being all the while perceived in him.
Some Suffumigations also, or perfumings, that are proper to the Stars, are of great force for the opportune receiving of Celestiall gifts under the rayes of the Stars, in as much as they do strongly work upon the Aire, and breath. For our breath is very much changed by such kind of vapours, if both vapours be of another like: The Aire also being through the said vapours easily moved, or affected with the qualities of inferiours, or those Celestiall, daily, and quickly penetrating our breast, and vitals, doth wonderfully reduce us to the like qualities; Wherefore Suffumigations are wont to be used to  them that are about to Sooth-say, for to affect their fancy, which indeed being duly appropriated to any certain Deities, do fit us to receive divine inspiration: So they say that fumes made with Lin-seed, and Flea-bane seed, and roots of Violets, and Parsly, doth make one to fore-see  things to come, and doth conduce to prophecying. Let no man wonder how great things suffumigations can do in the Aire, especially when he shall with Porphyrius  consider, that by certain vapours exhaling from proper suffumigations, airy spirits are presently raised, as also Thundrings, and Lightnings, and such like things. As the Liver of a Chamelion  being burnt on the top of the house, doth, as it is manifest, raise showers, and Lightnings. In like manner the head, and throat, if they be burnt with Oken  wood, cause Storms, and Lightnings. There are also suffumigations under opportune influencies of Stars, that make the images of spirits forthwith appear in the Aire, or elswhere. So they say, that if of Coriander, Smallage, Henbane, and hemlock be made a fume, that spirits will presently come together; hence they are called spirits Hearbs. Also it is said that a fume made of the root of the reedy Hearb  Sagapen, with the juice of Hemlock, and Henbane, and the Hearb  Tapsus Barbatus, red Sanders, and black Poppy, makes spirits and strange shapes appear: and if Smallage be added to them, chaseth away spirits from any place, and destroyes their visions. In like manner a fume made of Calamint, Peony, Mints, and Palma Christi, drives away all evil spirits, and vain imaginations. Moreover it is said that by certain fumes certain Animals are gathered together, and put to flight, as Pliny mentions concerning the stone Liparis, that with the fume thereof all beasts are called out; so the bones in the upper part of the throat of a Hart, being burnt, gather all the Serpents together, but the horn of the Hart being burnt doth with its fume chase them all away. The same doth a fume of the feathers of Peacocks. Also the lungs of an Asse being burnt, puts all poisonous things to flight; the fume of the burnt hoof of a Horse drives away Mice, the same doth the hoof of a Mule, with which also if it be the hoof of the left foot, Flies are driven away; And they say, if a house or any place be smoaked  with the gall of a Cutle fish, made into a confection with red Storax, Roses, and Lignum-aloes, and if then there be some Sea Water, or blood cast into that place, the whole house will seem to be full of Water, or blood; and if some Earth of plowed ground be cast there, the Earth will seem to quake. Now such kinds of vapours we must conceive do infect any body, and infuse a vertue into it, which doth continue long, even as any contagious, or poisonous vapour of the Pestilence, being kept for two yeers  in the Wall of a house, infect the inhabitants, and as the contagion of Pestilence, or Leprosie  lying hid in a garment, doth long after infect him that wears it. Therefore were certain suffumigations used to images, rings, and such like instruments of Magick, and hid treasures, and as Porphyrius  saith, very effectually. So they say, if any one shall hide Gold, or Silver, or any other pretious  thing, the Moon being in conjunction with the Sun, and shall fume the place with Coriander, Saffron, Henbane, Smallage, and black Poppy, of each a like quantity, bruised together, and tempered with the juice of Hemlock, that which is so hid shall never be found, or taken away, and that spirits shall continually keep it: and if any one shall endeavour to take it away, he shall be hurt by them, and shall fall into a frensie. And Hermes saith, that there is nothing like the fume of Sperma Ceti  for the raising of spirits: wherefore if a fume be made of that, and Lignum-aloes, Pepperwort, Musk, Saffron, red Storax tempered together, with the blood of a Lapwing, it will quickly gather airy spirits together, and if it be used about the graves of the dead, it gathers together spirits, and the Ghosts of the dead. So, as often as we direct any work to the Sun, we must make suffumigations with Solary things, if to the Moon, with Lunary things, and so of the rest. And we must know, that as there is a contrariety and enmity in Stars, and spirits, so also in suffumigations unto the same. So there is also a contrariety betwixt Lignum-aloes, and Sulphur, Frankincense, and Quick-silver, and spirits that are raised by the fume of Lignum-aloes, are allayed by the burning of Sulphur. As Proclus gives an example of a spirit, which was wont to appear in the form of a Lion, but by the setting of a Cock before it, vanished away, because there is a contrariety betwixt a Cock, and a Lyon, and so the like consideration, and practise is to be observed concerning such like things.
We make a suffumigation for the Sun in this manner, viz of Saffron, Amber-gryse, Musk, Lignum-aloes, Lignum-balsaim, the fruit of the Laurell, Cloves, Myrrh, and Frankincense, all which being bruised, and mixt in such a proportion as may make a sweet odour, must be incorporated with the brain of an Eagle, or the blood of a white Cock, after the manner of Pils, or Trochiscks. For the Moon we make a suffumigation of the head of a Frog dryed, the eyes of a Bull, the seed of white Poppy, Frankincense, and Camphir, which must be incorporated with Menstruous blood, or the blood of a Goose.
For Saturne take the seed of black Poppy, of Henbane, root of Mandrake, the Load-stone, and Myrrh, and make them up with the brain of a Cat, or the blood of a Bat.
For Jupiter take the seed of Ash, Lignum-aloes, Storax, the gum Benjamin, the Lazule  stone, the tops of the feathers of a Peacock, and incorporate them with the blood of a Stork, or a Swallow, or the brain of a Hart.
For Mars take Euphorbium, Bdellium, gum Armoniack, the roots of both Hellebors, the Load stone, and a little Sulphur, and incorporate them all with the brain of a Hart, the blood of a Man, and the blood of a black Cat.
For Venus take Musk, Amber-gryse, Lignum-aloes, red Roses, and red Corall, and make them up with the brain of Sparrows, and the blood of Pigeons.
For Mercury take Mastick, Frankincense, Cloves, and the Hearb  Cinquefoile, and the stone Achates, and incorporate them all with the brain of a Fox, or Weesel, and the blood of a Pie. Besides, to Saturne are appropriated for fumes all odoriferous roots, as Pepper-wort  root, &c. and the Frankincense tree: to Jupiter odoriferous fruits, as Nutmegs, Cloves:
to Mars all odoriferous wood, as Sanders, Cypress, Lignum-balsaim, and Lignum-aloes:
to the Sun, all Gums, Frankincense, Mastick, Benjamin, Storax, Laudanum, Amber-gryse, and Musk;
to Venus Flowers, as Roses, Violets, Saffron, and such like:
to Mercury all Pils  of Wood and fruit, as Cinnamon, Lignum Cassia, Mace, Citron pill, and Bayberries, and whatsoever seeds are odoriferous;
to the Moon the leaves of all Vegetables, as the leaf Indum, the leaves of the Myrtle, and Bay-tree.
Know also, that according to the opinion of the Magicians, in every good matter, as love, good will, and the like, there must be a good fume, odoriferous, and pretious; and in every evill matter, as hatred, anger, misery, and the like, there must be a stinking fume, that is of no worth. The twelve Signes also of the Zodiack have their proper fumes, as Aries hath Myrrh, Taurus, Pepper-wort, Gemini, Mastick; Cancer, Camphir, Leo, Frankincense, Virgo Sanders, Libra, Galbanum, Scorpio, Opoponax, Sagittarius, Lignum-aloes, Capricornus, Benjamin, Aquarius, Euphorbium, Pisces, red Storax.
But Hermes describes the most powerfull fume to be, viz that which is compounded of the seven Aromaticks, according to the powers of the seven Planets, for it receives from Saturne, Pepper-wort, from Jupiter, Nutmeg, from Mars, Lignum-aloes, from the Sun, Mastick, from Venus Saffron, from Mercury, Cinnamon, and from the Moon, the Myrtle.
Moreover Collyries, and Unguents, conveying the vertues of things Naturall, and Celestiall to our spirit, can multiply, transmute, transfigure, and transform it accordingly, as also transpose those vertues which are in them into it, that so it cannot act only upon its own body, but also upon that which is neer  it, and affect that by visible rayes, charmes, and by touching it, with some like quality. For because our spirit is the subtile, pure lucid, airy, and unctuous vapour of the blood; it is therefore fit to make Collyries of the like vapours, which are more sutable  to our spirit in subtance, for then by reason of their likeness, they do the more stir up, attract, and transform the spirit. The like vertues have certain ointments, and other confections. Hence by the touch sometimes sickness, poisonings, and love is induced; some things, as the hands, or garments being anointed: Also by kisses, some things being held in the mouth, love is induced, as in Virgil we read that Venus prayes Cupid
Now the sight, because it perceives more purely, and cleerly  then the other senses, and fastening in us the marks of things more acutely, and deeply, doth most of all, and before others agree with the Phantastick spirit, as is apparent in dreams, when things seen do more often present themselves to us then things heard, or any thing coming under the other senses. Therefore when Collyries transform visuall spirits, that spirit doth easily affect the imagination, which indeed being affected with divers species, and forms, transmits the same by the same spirit unto the outward sense of sight, by which occasion there is caused in it a perception of such species, and forms in that manner, as if it were moved by externall objects, that there seem to be seen terrible images, and spirits, and such like: so there are made Collyries, making us forthwith to see the images of spirits in the Aire, or elsewhere, as I know how to make of the gall of a man, and the eyes of a black Cat, and of some other things. The like is made also of the blood of a Lapwing, of a Bat, and of a Goat, and they say, if a smooth shining piece of Steel be smeered  over with the juice of Mugwort, and made to fume, it will make invocated spirits to be seen in it. So also there are some suffumigations, or unctions, which make men speak in their sleep, to walk, and to do those things which are done by men that are awake, and sometimes to do those things, which men that are awake cannot, or dare not do. Some there are that make us to hear horrid, or delectable sounds, and such like. And this is the cause why Maniacall, and Melancholy men believe they see, and hear those things without, which their imagination doth only fancy within, hence they fear things not to be feared, and fall into wonderfull, and most false suspicions, and fly when none pursueth them, are angry, and contend, no body being present, and fear where no fear is. Such like passions also can magicall confections induce, by Suffumigations, by Collyries, by Unguents, by potions, by poisons, by lamps, and lights, by looking glasses, by images, enchantments, charms, sounds, and Musick. Also by divers rites, observations, ceremonies, religions, and superstitions; all which shall be handled in their places. And not only by these kind of arts, passions, apparitions, and images induced, but also things themselves, which are really changed, and transfigured into divers forms, as the Poet relates of Proteus, Periclimenus, Acheloas, and Merra, the daughter of Erisichthon: So also Circe changed the companions of Ulysses, & of old in the sacrifices of Jupiter Lycæus, the men that tasted of the inwards of the sacrifices, were turned into Wolves, which Pliny saith, befell a certain man called Demarchus, the same opinion was Austin  of: for he saith, whilest he was in Italy, he heard of some women that by giving Sorceries in cheese to travellorsr, turned them into working Catler, and when they had done such work as they would have them, turned them into men again, and that this befell a certain Father called Prestantius. The Scriptures themselves testify that Pharaos  Sorcerers turned their rods into Serpents, and water into blood, and did such like things.
When the soul of the world, by its vertue doth make all things that are naturally generated, or artificially made, fruitfull, by infusing into them Celestiall properties for the working of some wonderfull effects, then things themselves not only when applyed by suffumigations, or Collyries, or oyntments, or potions, or any other such like way, but also when they being conveniently wrapt  up, are bound to, or hanged about the neck, or in any other way applyed, although by never so easy a contact, do impress their vertue upon us. By these alligations therefore, suspensions, wrappings up, applications, and contacts the Accidents of the body, and mind are changed into sickness, health, boldness, fear, sadness, and joy, and the like: They render them that carry them, gratious, or terrible, acceptable, or rejected, honoured, and beloved, or hatefull, and abominable. Now these kind of passions are conceived to be by the abovesaid, infused no otherwise, then is manifest in the graffing  of trees, where the vitall vertue is sent, and Communicated from the trunk to the twig graffed  into it, by way of contact and alligation; so in the female Palme tree, when she comes neer to the male, her boughs bend to the male, and are bowed: which the gardeners seeing, bind ropes from the male to the female, which becomes straight again, as if it had by this continuation of the rope received the vertue of the male. In like manner we see, that the cramp-fish being touched afar off with a long pole, doth presently stupify  the hand of him that toucheth it. And if any shall touch the sea Hare with his hand or stick, doth presently run out of his wits. Also if the fish called Stella, as they say, being fastned  with the blood of a Fox and a brass nail to a gate, evill medicines can do no hurt. Also it is said, that if a woman take a needle, and beray it with dung, and then wrap it up in earth, in which the carkass carcass of a man was buryed, and shall carry it about her in a cloth which was used at the funerall, that no man shall be able to ly  with her as long as she hath it about her. Now by these examples we see, how by certain alligations of certain things, as also suspensions, or by a simple contact, or the continuation of any thread, we may be able to receive some vertues thereby. It is necessary that we know the certain rule of alligation, and suspension, and the manner which the Art requires, viz that they be done under a certain, and sutable  constellation, and that they be done with wyer, or silken threads, with hair, or sinews of certain animals. And things that are to be wrapped up must be done in the leaves of hearbs, or the skins of animals, or fine cloths, and the like, according to the sutableness  of things: as if you would procure the solary vertue of any thing, this being wrapped up in bay leaves, or the skin of a Lion, hang it about thy neck with a golden thread, or a silken thread of a yallow  colour, whilest the Sun rules in the heaven: so thou shalt be endued with the Solary vertue of that thing. But if thou dost desire the vertue of any Saturnine thing, thou shalt in like maner take that thing whilest Saturn raignes, and wrap it up in the skin of an Ass, or in a cloth used at a funerall, especially if thou desirest it for sadness, and with a black thread hang it about thy neck. In like manner we must conceive of the rest.
Rings also, which were alwaies much esteemed of by the Ancients, when they are opportunely made, do in like manner impress their vertue upon us, in as much as they do affect the spirit of him that carries them with gladness or sadness, and render him courteous, or terrible, bold, or fearfull, amiable, or hatefull; in as much as they do fortifie us against sickness, poisons, enemies, evill spirits, and all manner of hurtfull things, or, at least will not suffer us to be kept under them. Now the manner of making these kinds of Rings, is this, viz when any Star ascends fortunately, with the fortunate aspect, or conjunction of the Moon, we must take a stone, and Hearb  that is under that Star, and make a Ring of the Metall that is sutable  to this Star, and in it fasten the stone, putting the Hearb, or root under it; not omitting the inscriptions of images, names, and Characters, as also the proper suffumigations, but we shall speak more of these in another place, where we shall treat of Images, and Characters. So we read in Philostratus Jarchus, that a wise Prince of the Indians bestowed seven Rings made after this manner, marked with the vertues, and names of the seven Planets, to Apollonius, of which he wore every day one, distinguishing them according to the names of the dayes, by the benefit of which he lived above one hundred and thirty years, as also alwaies retained the beauty of his youth. In like manner Moses the Law-giver, and ruler of the Hebrews, being skilled in the Egyptian Magick, is said by Josephus to have made Rings of love, and oblivion. There was also, as saith Aristotle, amongst the Cireneans a Ring of Battus, which could procure love and honour. We read also that Eudamus a cerain Philosopher made Rings against the bites of Serpents, bewitchings, and evil spirits. The same doth Josephus relate of Solomon. Also we read in Plato that Gygus, King of Lydia had a Ring of wonderfull, and strange vertues, the seal of which, when he turned it toward the palm of his hand, no body could sviee him, but he could see all things: by the opportunity of which Ring he ravished the Queen, and slew the King his Master, and killed whomsoever he thought stood in his way, and in these villanies no body could see him, and at length by the benefit of this Ring be became King of Lydia.
There be wonderfull vertues of places accompanying them, either from things there placed, or by the influences of the Stars, or in any other way. For as Pliny relates of a Cuckow, in what place any one doth first hear him, if his right foot be marked about and, and that foot-step  digged up, there will no Fleas be bred in that place where it is scattered. So they say that the dust of the track of a Snake being gathered up, and scattered amongst Bees, makes them return to their hives. So also that the dust, in which a Mule hath rolled himself, being cast upon the Body, doth mitigate the heat of love, and that the dust wherein a Hawk hath rolled her self, if it be bound to the body in a bright red cloth, cures the quartane. So doth the stone taken out of the nest of a Swallow, as they say, presently relieve those that have the falling sickness, and being bound to the party, continually preserve them, especially if it be rolled in the blood, or heart of a Swallow. And it is reported That if any one shall cut a veine, and being fasting, shall go over a place where any one lately fell with the fit of a Falling sickness, that he shall fall into the same disease. And Pliny reports, that to fasten an Iron naile in that place where he that fell with a fit of the Falling sickness first pitched his head, will free him from his disease. So they say that an Hearb  growing upon the head of any image, being gathered, and bound up in some part of ones garment with a red thread, shall presently allay the headach; and that any Hearb  gathered out of the brooks or rivers before Sun rising, and no body see him that gathers it, shall cure the Tertian, if it be bound to the left arm, the sick party not knowing what is done. But amongst places that are appropriated to the Stars, all stinking places, dark, underground, religious, and monrnfull places, as Church-yards, tombes, and houses not inhabited by men, and old, tottering, obscure, dreadfull houses, and solitary dens, caves, and pits, also fish-ponds, standing pools, fennes, and such like are appropriated to Saturne. Unto Jupiter are ascribed all privileged places, Consistories of noble men, Tribunals, Chaires, places for Exercises, Schools, and all beautifull, and clean places, scattered, or sprinkled with divers odours. To Mars, fiery, and bloody places, furnaces, bake-houses, shambles, places of execution, and places where there have been great battailes  fought, and slaughters made, and the like. To the Sun, light places, the Serene Aire, Kings Pallaces, and Princes Courts, Pulpits, Theators, Thrones, and all kingly, and Magnificent places. To Venus, pleasant fountains, green Meadows, flowrishing  Gardens, garnished beds, stews (and according to Orpheus) the sea, the sea shore, baths, dancing-places, and all places belonging to women. To Mercury, shops, schools, ware-houses, Exchange for Merchants, and the like. To the Moon, wildernesses, woods, rocks, hils, mountains, forrests, fountains, waters, rivers, seas, sea-shores, ships, groves, high-waies, and granaries for Corn, and such like. Upon this account they that endeavor to procure love, are wont to bury for a certain time the instruments of their art, whether they be rings, images, looking-glasses, or any other, or hide them in a stew house, because in that place they will contract some venerall faculty, no otherwise then things that stand in stinking places, become stinking, and those in an Aromaticall place, become Aromaticall, and of a sweet savour. The four corners of the Earth also pertain to this matter. Hence they that are to gather a Saturnall, Martiall, or Joviall Hearb, must look towards the East, or South, partly because they desire to be orientall from the Sun, and partly, because of their principall houses, viz Aquarius, Scorpius, Sagittarius are Southern signes, so also are Capricornus, and Pisces. But they that will gather a Venerall, Mercuriall. or Lunary Hearb, must look towards the West, because they delight to be western, or else they must look Northward, because their principall houses, viz Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Virgo are Northern signes, so in any Solary work we must look towards the Eas, or South, but rather towards the Solary body, and light.
Light also is a quality that partakes much of form, and is a simple act, and a representation of the understanding: it is first diffused from the Mind of God into all things, but in God the Father, the Father of Light, it is the first true light; then in the Son a beautifull overflowing brightness, and in the Holy Ghost a burning brightness, exceeding all Intelligencies; yea, as Dyonisius saith, of Seraphins, In Angels therefore it is a shining intelligence diffused, an abundant joy beyond all bounds of reason yet received in divers degrees, according to the Nature of the intelligence that receives it; Then it descends into the Celestiall bodies, where it becomes a store of life, and an effectuall propagation, even a visible splendor. In the fire a certain naturall liveliness infused into it by the heavens. And lastly in men, it is a clear discourse of reason, an knowledge of divine things, and the whole rationall: but this is manifold, either by reason of the disposition of the body, as the Peripateticks will have it, or which is more true, by reason of the good pleasure of him that bestows it, who gives it to every one as he pleaseth. From thence it passeth to the fancy, yet above the sense, but only imaginable, and thence to the sence, but especially to that of the eyes; In them it becomes a visible clearness, and is extended to other perspicuous bodies, in which it becomes a colour, and a shining beauty, but in dark bodies it is a certain beneficiall and generative vertue, and penetrates, to the very center, where the beames of it being collected into a narrow place, it becomes a dark heat, tormenting, and scorching, so that all things perceive the vigour of the light according to their capacity, all which joyning to it self with an enlivening heat, and passing through all things, doth convey its qualities, and vertues through all things. Therefore Magicians forbid the Urin  of a sick man to be sprinkled in the shadow a sick man, or to be uncovered against the Sun or the Moon, because the rayes of the light penetrating, bringing suddenly with it the noxious qualities of the sick bodies, convey them into the opposite body, and affect that with a quality of the same kind. This is the reason why Enchanters have a care to cover their Enchantments with their shadow. So the Civet cat make all Dogs dumb with the very touch of her shadow. Also there are made artificially some Lights, by Lamps, Torches, Candles, and such like, of some certain thing, and liquors opportunely chosen, according to the rule of the Stars, and composed amongst themselves according to their congruity, which when they be lighted, and shine alone, are wont to produce some wonderfull, and Celestiall effects, which men many times wonder at, as Pliny reports out of Anaxilaus, of a poison of Mares after copulation, which being lighted in Torches, doth monstrously represent a sight of horse heads: the like may be done of Asses, and flies, which being tempered with wax, & lighted, make a strange sight of flies: and the skin of a Serpent lighted in a Lamp, maketh Serpents appear. And they say when Grapes are in their flower, if any one shall bind a Viall to them full of Oile, and shall let it alone till they be ripe, and then the Oile be lighted in a Lamp, it makes Grapes to be seen. And so in other fruits. If Centory be mixed with Honey, and the blood of a Lapwing, and be put in a Lamp, they that stand about will seem a great deal bigger then they are wont: and if it be lighted in a clear night, the Stars will seem to be scattered the one from the other. Such force also is in the inke of the Cuttle fish, that it being put into a Lamp, makes Black-mores  appear. It is also reported, that a Candle made of some certain Saturnine things, if being lighted, it be extinguished in the mouth of a man newly dead, will afterwards, as oft as it shines alone, bring great sadness, and fear upon them that stand about it. Of such like Torches, Lamps, doth Hermes speak more of, also Plato, and Chyrannides,  and of the latter writers Albertus in a certain Treatise of this particular thing.
Colours also are a kind of lights, which being mixed with things, are wont to expose them to those Stars, to which they are agreeable. And we shall afterwards speak of some colours, which are the lights of the Planets, by which even the natures of fixed Stars themselves are understood, which also may be applyed to the flames of Lamps, and Candles. But in this place we shall relate how the colours of inferiour mixt things are distributed to divers Planets.
For all colours, black, lucid, earthy, leaden, brown, have relation to Saturne.
Saphire, and airy colours, and those which are alwaies green, clear, purple, darkish, golden, mixed with Silver, belong to Jupiter.
Red colours, and burning, fiery, flaming, violet, purple, bloody, and iron colours, resemble Mars.
Golden, Saffron, purple, and bright colours, resemble the Sun.
But all white, fair, curious, green, ruddy, betwixt saffron, and purple, resemble Venus, Mercury, and the Moon.
Moreover amongst the houses of the heaven, the first and seventh hath white colour: the second, and twelfth green: the third, and eleventh saffron: the fourth, and the tenth red: the fift, and ninth honey colour: the sixt, and eighth, black. The Elements also have their colours, by which Naturall Philosophers judge of the complexion and property of their nature; For an earthy colour, caused of coldness, and dryness is brown, and black, and manifests black Choller, and a Saturnine nature; the blew  tending towards whiteness, doth denote flegme: for cold makes white, moisture and dryness makes black: reddish colour shews blood, but fiery, flaming, burning hot, shew choller, which by reason of its subtilty, and aptness to mix with others, doth cause divers colours more: for if it be mixed with blood, and blood be most predominant, it makes a florid red; if choller  predominate, it makes a redish  colour; if there be an equall mixtion, it makes a sad red. But if adust choller  be mixed with blood, it makes a Hempen colour, and red, if blood predominate, and somewhat red if choller  prevaile; but if it be mixed with a melancholy humour, it makes a black colour, but with malancholy, and flegme  together, in an equall proportion, it makes a Hempen colour: If flegme  abound, a mud colour, if melancholy, a blewish; but if it be mixed with flegme  alone, in an equall proportion, it makes a citrine  colour; if unequally, a pale, or palish. Now all colours are more prevalent, when they be in silk, or in metals, or in perspicuous substances, or pretious  stones; and in those things which resemble Celestiall bodies in colour, especially in living things.
Fascination is a binding, which comes from the spirit of the Witch, through the eyes of him that is bewitched, entering to his heart. Now the instrument of Fascination is the spirit, viz a certain pure, lucid, subtile vapour, generated of the purer blood, by the heat of the heart. This doth alwaies send forth, through the eyes, rayes like to it self; Those rayes being sent forth, do carry with them a spirituall vapour, and that vapour a blood, as it appears in bleer, and red eyes, whose raies  being sent forth to the eyes of him that is opposite, and looks upon them, carries the vapour of the corrupt blood, together with it self, by the contagion of which, it doth infect the eyes of the beholder with the like disease. So the eye being opened, and intent upon any one with a strong imagination, doth dart its beams, which are the Vehiculum of the spirit into the eyes of him that is opposite to him, which tender spirit strikes the eyes of him that is bewitched, being stirred up from the heart of him that strikes, and possesseth the breast of him that is stricken, wounds his heart, and infects his spirit. Whence Apuleius saith, Thy eyes sliding down through my eyes, into mine inward breast, stir up a most vehement burning in my Marrow. Know therefore that men are most bewitched, when with often beholding they direct the edge of their sight to the edg  of their sight that bewitch them, and when their eyes are reciprocally intent one upon the other, and when raies  are joyned to raies, and lights to lights, for then the spirit of the one is joyned to the spirit of the other, and fixeth its sparks: So are strong ligations made, and so most vehement loves are inflamed with the only raies of the eyes, even with a certain sudden looking on, as if it were with a dart, or stroke penetrating the whole body, whence then the spirit, and amorous blood being thus wounded, are carried forth upon the lover, and enchanter, no otherwise then the blood, and spirit of the vengeance of him that is slain, are upon him that slayes him. Whence Lucretius sang concerning those amorous bewitchings.
So great is the power of Fascination, especially when the vapours of the eyes are subservient to the affection. Therefore Witches use Collyries, ointments, alligations, and such like, to affect, and corroborate the spirit this or that manner. To procure love, they use venereall collyries, as Hippomanes, the blood of Doves, or Sparrows, and such like. To induce fear, they use Martiall Collyries, as of the eyes of Wolves, the Civet Cat, and the like. To procure misery or sickness, they use Saturnine, and so of the rest.
They say that certain acts, and observations have a certain power of naturall things, that they believe diseases may be expelled, or brought thus, and thus. So they say that quartanes may be driven away if the parings of the nails of the sick be bound to the neck of a live Eel in a linnen clout, and she be let go into the water. And Pliny saith, that the paring of a sick mans nailes of his feet, and hands being mixed with wax, cure the quartan, tertian, and quotidian Ague, and if they be before Sun rising fastened to another mans gate, will cure such like diseases. In like manner let all the parings of the nailes be put into Pismires caves, and they say that that which begun to draw the nailes first must be taken, and bound to the neck, and by this means will the disease be removed. They say that by Wood stricken with lightning, and cast behind the back with ones hands, any disease may be cured, and in quartanes a piece of a naile from a Gibbet, wrapt up in Wooll, and hanged about the neck, cures them; also a Rope doth the like, that is taken from a Gallows, and hid under ground, that the Sun cannot reach it. Also the throat of him that hath a hard swelling, or imposthume, being touched with the hand of him that dyed  by an immature death, is cured thereby. Also they say, that a woman is presently eased of her hard travel, if any one shall put into the bed, where the woman in travel  is, a stone, or dart, with which either of these Animals, viz a Man, a Boar, or a Bear were at one blow killed. The same also, as they say, doth a spear that is pulled out of the body of a man, if it shall not first touch the ground; also they say that Arrows pulled out of the body of a man, if they have not touched the Earth, and be put under any one lying down, will procure love; Also they say that the falling sickness is cured by meat made of the flesh of a wild beast, slain in the same manner as a man is slain. Also they say that a mans eyes that are washed three times with the water wherein he hath washed his feet, shall never be sore or bleer. It is said that some do cure diseases of the groin with threed  taken out of the Weavers Loom, being tyed  in nine, or seven knots, the name of some Widow being named at every knot. Also the Spleen of Catle  extended upon pained Spleens, cures them, if he that applies it, saith that he is applying a medicine to the Spleen to cure, and ease it: After this, they say, the patient must be shut into a sleeping room, the dore  being sealed up with a Ring, and some verse be repeated over nineteen times. The Urine of a green Lizard cures the same disease, if it be hanged up in a pot before the patients bed-chamber, so that he may, as he comes in and out, touch it with his hand. Also a Lizard killed in the Urine of a Calf, as they say, retains his lust that put it in: but he that shall put his own Urine into a Dogs Urine, is said to be made thereby dull to venerous acts, and to feel a benummedness in his loins. They say, that if ones own Urine be dropped upon the foot in the morning, it is a remedy against all evil medicines. And a little Frog climbing up a tree, if any one shall spit in his mouth, and then let him escape, is said to cure the Cough. It is a wonderfull thing, but easy to experience, what Pliny speaks of, If any one shall be sorry for any blow that he hath given another afar off, or nigh at hand, if he shall presently spit into the middle of that hand with which he gave the blow, the party that was smitten shall presently be freed from pain. This hath been approved of in a four-footed beast that hath been sorely hurt. Some there are that aggravate the blow before they give it. In like maner spitle  carried in the hand, or to spit in the shooe  of the right foot before it be put on, is good when any one passeth through a dangerous place. They say that Wolves will not come to a field, if one of them be taken, and the blood let by little and little out of his legs, being unbroken, with a knife, and sprinkled about the outsides of the field, and he himself be buried in that place, from which he was first drawn. The Methanenses, Citizens of Trezenium, accounted it as a present remedy for preserving of Vines from the wrong of the Southern wind, having alwaies found it by most certain experience; if whilest the wind blows, a white Cock should be pulled to pieces in the middle by two men, both which keeping their part, must walk round the Vineyard, and both meeting in the place from whence they began their Circuit, must that place bury the pieces of the Cock. They say also that if any one shall hold a Viper over a vapour with a staffe, he shall prophecy, and that the staffe wherewith a Snake was beaten is good against diseases of breeding women. These things Pliny recites. It is said also in gathering roots and hearbs, we must draw three circles round about them, first with a sword, then dig them up, taking heed in the mean time of a contrary wind. Also they say, that if any one shall measure a dead man with a rope, first from the Elbow to the biggest finger, then from the shoulder to the same finger, and afterwards from the head to the feet, making thrice those mensurations, if any one afterward shall be measured with the same rope in the same maner, he shall not prosper, but be unfortunate, and fall into misery, and sadness. And Albertus out of Chyrannis saith, that if any woman hath enchanted thee to love her, take the sheet  she lies in, and piss through her hood, and her right sleeve, out of doors, and the enchantment will be quitted. And Pliny saith, that to sit by women great with child, or when a medicine is given to any one of them, the fingers being joyned  together like the teeth of a Kemb, is a charm. This was known by experience in Alcumena breeding Hercules: and so much the worse, if that be done about one, or both knees. Also to sit cross legged, is Sorcery, therefore it was forbiden  to be done in the Counsels of Princes, and Rulers, as a thing which hindred all acts. And it is said, if any one standing before the door call the man by his name, that is lying with a woman, and he answer, if then he fasten a knife, or needle on the door, and break it, the edge being downward, he that is in the bed with the woman cannot couple with her as long as those things shall be there.
The countenance, gesture, the motion, setting, and figure of the body, being accidentall to us, conduce to the receiving of Celestiall gifts, and expose us to the superiour bodies, and produce certain effects in us, no otherwise then in Hellebor, which when thou gatherest, if thou pullest the leaf upward, it draws the humors upward, and causeth vomiting; if downward, it causeth purging, by drawing the humor downward. How much also the countenauce, gesture, do affect the sight, imagination, and Animall spirit, no man is ignorant. So they that couple for generation, for the most part are wont to make an impression on the children that are then begotten, of that countenance which they themselves then form, or imagine: So a mild, and cheerfull countenance of a Prince in the City, makes the people joyfull: but fierce, and sad, terrifies them: so the gesture, and countenance of any one lamenting, doth easily move to pitty: So the shape of an amiable person, doth easily excite to love. Thou must know that such like gestures, and figures, as harmonies of the body do expose it no otherwise to the Celestials, then odours, and the spirit of a Medicine, and internall passions do the soul. For as Medicines, and passions of the mind are by certain dispositions of the Heaven increased so also the gesture, and motion of the body do get an efficacy by certain influences of the heavens. For there are gestures resembling Saturne, which are melancholy, and sad, as are beating of the breast, striking of the head: also such as are Religious, as the bowing of the knee, and a fixt look downwards, as of one praying, also weeping, and such like, as are used by an Austere, and Saturnine man, such an one as the Satyrist describes, saying,
A cheerfull, and honest countenance, a worshipfull gesture, clapping of the hands, as of one rejoycing, and praising; also the bending of the knee, with the head lifted up, as of one that is worshiping, are ascribed to Jupiter. A sowre, fierce, cruell, angry, rough countenance, and gesture, are ascribed to Mars. Solary are honourable, and couragious  gestures, and countenances: also walkings abroad, bending of the knee, as of one honoring a King with one knee. Venereal, are dances, embraces, laughters, amiable, and cheerfull countenances. Mercuriall are inconstant, quick, variable, and such like gestures, and countenances. Lunary are such as are moveable, poisonfull, and childish, and the like. And as we have spoke of gestures, so also are the shapes of men distinct. For Saturne bespeaks a man to be of a black, and yellowish colour, lean, crooked, of a rough skin, great veines, hairy all over his body, little eyes, of a frowning forehead, of a thin beard, great lips, eyes intent upon the ground, of a heavy gate, striking his feet together as he walks, crafty, witty, a seducer, and murderous. Jupiter signifies a man to be of a pale colour, darkish red, a handsome body, good stature, bold, of great eyes, not black altogether, large pupill, short nostrils, not equall, great teeth before, curld hair, of good disposition, and manners. Mars makes a man red, of a red hair, round face, yellowish eyes, of a terrible, and sharp looks, bold, jocund, proud, crafty. The Sun makes a man of a tauny  colour, betwixt yellow and black, dasht  with red, of a short stature, yet of a handsome body, without much hair, and curld, of yellow eyes, wise, faithfull, desirous of praise. Venus signifies a man to be tending towards blackness, but more white, with mixture of red, of a handsome body, a fair, and round face, fair hair, fair eyes, the blackness whereof is more intense, of good manners, and honest love, also kind, patient, and jocund; Mercury signifies a man not much white, or black, of a long face, high forehead, fair eyes, not black, to have a streight, and long nose, thin beard, long fingers, to he ingenious, a subtile inquisitor, turn-coat, and subject to many fortunes. The Moon signifies a man to be in colour white, mixed with a little red, of a fair stature, round face, with some marks in it, eyes not fully black, frowning forehead, also kind, gentle, sociable.There are some other kinds of divinations, depending upon naturall causes, which are known to every one in his art, and experience, to be in divers things; by which Physitians, husbandmen, shepheards, Mariners, and every one of these out of probable signes do Prognosticate. Many of these kinds Aristotle made mention of in his Book of Times. Amongst which Auguria, and Auspicia are the chiefest, which were in former time in such esteem amongst the Romanes, that they would do nothing that did belong to private or publique  business without the counsell of the Augures: Cicero also in his Book of Divinations largely declares, that the people of Tuscia would do nothing without this art. Now there are divers kinds of Auspicias: for some are called Pedestria (i.e.) which are taken from four-footed beasts: Some are called Auguria, which are taken from birds: Some are Celestiall, which are taken from thundrings, and lightnings; some are called Caduca (i.e.) when any fell in the temple, or elsewhere; Some were sacred, which were taken from sacrifices. Some of these were called Piacula, and sad Auspicia, as when a sacrifice escaped from the Altar, or being smitten made a bellowing, or fell upon another part of his body then he should. To these is added Exauguration, viz, when the rod fell out of the hand of the Augure, with which it was the custome to view, and take notice of the Aupicium. Michael Scotus makes mention of twelve kinds of Augurias, viz Six on the right hand, the names of which he saith are Fernova, Fervetus, Confert, Emponenthem, Sonnasarnova, Sonnasarvetus: and the other six on the left hand, the names of which are, Confernova, Confervetus, Viaram, Herrenam, Scassarnova, and Scassarvetus. Then expounding their names, he saith, Fernova is an Augurium; when thou goest out of thy house to do any business, and in going thou seest a man, or a bird going, or flying, so that either of them set himself before thee upon thy left hand, that is a good signification, in reference to thy business. Fervetus is an Augurium; when thou shalt go out of thy house for to do any business, and in going thou findest or seest a bird, or a man resting himself before thee on the left side of thee, that is an ill sign in reference to thy business: Viaram is an Augurium; when a man or a bird in his journey, or flying passeth before thee, coming from the right side of thee, and bending toward the left, goeth out of thy sight, that is a good sign concerning thy business. Confernova is an Augurium; when thou dost first find a man, or a bird going, or flying, and then he rest himself before thee on thy right side, thou seeing of it, that is a good sign concerning thy business; Confervetus is an Augurium; when first thou findest, or seest a man, or a bird bending from thy right side, it is an ill sign concerning thy business. Scimasarnova is an Augurium; when a man, or a bird comes behind thee, and outgoeth thee, but before he comes at thee, he rests, thou seeing of him on thy right side, it is to thee a good sign. Scimasarvetus is an Augurium; when thou seest a man, or bird behind thee, but before he comes to thee he rests in that place, thou seeing of it, is a good sign.
Confert is an Augurium; when a man or bird in journeying, or flying shall pass behind thee, coming from the left side of thee, and bending toward thy right, pass out of thy sight, and is an evill sign concerning thy business.
Scassarvetus is when thou seest a man, or a bird passing by thee, and resting in a place on thy left side, it is an evill sign to thee.
Emponenthem is when a man, or a bird, coming from thy left side, and passing to thy right, goeth out of thy sight without resting, it is a good sign. Hartena is an Augurium; if a man or a bird coming from thy right hand, passing behind thy back to thy left, and thou shall see him resting any where, this is an evill sign. Thus much Scotus. The Ancients did also prognosticate from sneesings, of which Homer in the seventeenth book of his Odyssey makes mention, because they thought they proceeded from a sacred place, viz the head, in which the intellect is vigourous, and operative. Whence also whatsoever speech came into the breast, or mind of a man rising in the morning unawares, is said to be some presage, and an Augurium.
The Signes also, and faces of Signes have their figures, and shapes, which he that would know, must seek them out in books of Astrology. Lastly, upon these figures, and gestures, Physiognomy, and Metoposcopy, arts of divination do depend: Also Chyromancy, foretelling future events, not as causes, but as signes through like effects, caused by the same cause. And although these divers kinds of divinations may seem to be done by inferiour, and weak signes, yet the judgements of them are not to be slighted, or condemned, when prognostication is made by them, not out of superstition, but by reason of the harmoniacall correspondency of all the parts of the body. Whosoever therefore doth the more exactly imitate the Celestiall bodies, either in nature, study, action, motion, gesture, countenance, passions of the mind, and opportunity of the season, is so much the more like to the heavenly bodies, and can receive larger gifts from them.
All the Auspicia  which first happen in the beginning of any enterprise are to be taken notice of: as, if in the beginning of thy work thou shalt perceive that Rats have gnawn thy garments, desist from thy undertakings; If going forth thou shalt stumble at the threshold, or if in the way thou shalt dash thy foot against any thing, forbear thy journey; If any ill omen happen in the beginning of thy business, put off thy undertakings, least thy intentions be wholly frustrated, or accomplished to no purpose; but expect and wait for a fortunate hour for the dispatching of thy affairs with a better omen. We see that many Animals are, by a naturall power imbred in them, propheticall. Doth not the Cock by his crowing diligently tell you the hours of the night, and morning, and with his wings spread forth chase away the Lion; and many birds with their singing, and chattering, and flies by their sharp pricking foretell rain, and Dolphins by their often leaping above the water, fore-run  tempests. It would be too long to relate all the passages, which the Phrygians, Cilicians, Arabians, Umbrians, Tuscians, and other peoples, which follow the Augurias, learned by birds. These they have proved by many experiments, and examples. For in all things the Oracles of things to come are hid: but those are the chiefest which Ominall  birds shall foretell. These are those which the Poets relate were turned from men into birds. Therefore what the Daw declares, hearken, and mark, observing her setting as she sits, and her manner of flying, whether on the right hand, or left, whether clamorous, or silent, whether she goes before, or follows after, whether she waits for the approach of him that passeth by, or flies from him, and which way she goes; all these things must be diligently observed. Orus Apollo saith in his Hyeroglyphicks, Daws that are twins signifie marriage, because this Animall brings forth two eggs, out of which male, and female must be brought forth: But if (which seldom happens) two males be generated, or two females, the males will not couple with any other females, nor females with any other males, but will alwaies live without a mate; and solitary. Therefore they that meet a single Daw, divine thereby that they shall live a single life. The same also doth a black Hen Pigeon betoken; for after the death of her mate, she alwaies lives single. Thou shalt as carefully observe Crows, which are as significant as Daws, yea, and in greater matters. It was Epictetus the Stoicks Philosophers judgment, who was a Sage Author, that if a Crow did croke  over against any one, it did betoken some evill, either to his body, fortune, honour, wife, or children. Then thou shall take heed to Swans, who foreknow the secrets of the waters, for their cheerfulness doth presage happy events not only to Marriners, but all other travellers, unless they be overcome by the coming over of a stronger, as of an Eagle, who by the most potent Majesty of her soveraignty  makes null the predictions of all other birds, if she speaks to the contrary; for she flies higher then all other birds, and is of more acute sight, and is never excluded from the secrets of Jupiter: She portends advancement, and victory, but by blood; because she drinks no water but blood. An Eagle flying over the Locrensians, fighting against the Crotoniensians gave them victory. An Eagle setting her self unawares upon the Target of Hiero, going forth to the first War, betokened that he should be King. Two Eagles sitting all day upon the house at the birth of Alexander of Macedonia, did portend to him an omen of two Kingdomes, viz Asia, and Europe. An Eagle also taking off the hat of Lucias Tarquinius Priscus, Son to Demarathus the Corinthian (flying from home by reason of some discord, and being come into Hetraria, and going to Rome) and then flying high with it, and afterwards putting it upon his head again, did portend to him the Kingdome of the Romans. Vulturs  signifie difficulty, hardness, ravenousness, which was verified in the beginning of building of Cities. Also they foretell the places of slaughter, coming seven dayes before hand; and because they have most respect to that place where the greatest slaughter shall be, as if they gaped after the greatest number of the slain; therefore the ancient Kings were wont to send out spies to take notice what place the Vulturs  had most respect to. The Phoenix promiseth singular good success, which being seen anew, Rome was built very auspiciously. The Pellican, because she hazards her self for her young, signifies that a man should out of the zeal of his love undergo much hardship. The painted bird gave the name to the City of Pictavia, and foreshewed the lenity of that people by its colour, and voice. The Heron is an Augurium of hard things. The Stork is a bird of concord, and makes concord. Cranes gives us notice of the trechery  of enemies. The bird Cacupha betokens gratitude, for she alone doth express love to her Dam, being spent with old age. On the contrary, Hippopotamus that kils  his Dam, doth betoken ingratitude for good turn, also injustice. The bird Origis is most envious, and betokens envy.
Amongst the smaller birds, the Pie is talkative, and foretels  guests. The bird Albanellus flying by any one, if from the left to the right, betokens cheerfulness of entertainment, if contrarywise, betokens the contrary. The scritch  Owl is alwaies unlucky, so also is the horn Owl, who because she goes to her young by night unawares, as death comes unawares, is therefore said to foretell death: yet sometimes, because she is not blind in the dark of the night, doth betoken diligence, and watchfulness, which she made good, when she sate upon the spear of Hiero. Dido, when she sees the unlucky Owl, pittied  Æneas, whence the Poet sang,
The same same bird sang in the Capitoll when the Romane affaires were low at Numantia, and when Fregelia was pulled down for a conspiracy made against the Romans. Almadel saith, that Owls, and night-ravens, when they turn aside to strange countries, or houses, betoken the death of the men of that country, and those houses; for those birds are delighted with dead Carkases, and perceive them before hand. For men that are dying have a neer affinity with dead Carkases. The Hawk also is a foreteller of contention, as Naso sings.
Lelius the Embassadour of Pompey was slain in Spain amongst the Purveyours, which misfortune, a Hawk flying over the head, is said to foretell. And Almadel saith, that these kind of birds fighting amongst themselves, signifie the change of a Kingdome; but if birds of another kind shall fight with them, and are never seen to come together again, it portends a new condition, and state of that Country. Also little birds by their coming to, or departing from, foreshew that a family shall be inlarged, or lessened, and their flight, by how much the more serene it is, by so much the more laudable. Whence Melampus the Augure conjectured at the slaughter of the Greeks by the flight of little birds, when he saith, Thou seest that no bird taketh his flight in fair weather. Swallows, because when they are dying they provide a place of safety for their young, do portend a great patrimony, or Legacy after the death of friends. A Bat meeting any one running away, signifies an evasion: for although she have no wings, yet she flies. A Sparrow is a bad omen to one that runs away, for she flies from the Hawk, and makes hast  to the Owl, where she is in as great danger: yet in love she is fortunate, for being stirred up with lust, couples seven times in an hour. Bees are a good omen to Kings, for they signifie an obsequious people. Flies signifie importunity, and impudency, because being oftentimes driven away, they do yet continually return. Also domestick birds are not without some Augurias, for Cocks by their crowing promote hope, and the journey of him that is undertaking it. Moreover Livia the mother of Tiberius, when she was great with him, took a Hen-Egg and hatched it in her bosome, and at length came forth a Cock chick with a great comb, which the Augures interpreted that the child that should be born of her should be King. And Cicero writes that at Thebais Cocks, by their crowing all night, did presage that the Bætians would obtain victory against the Lacedæmonians: and the reason is according to the Augures interpretations, because that bird when he is beaten is silent, but when he himself hath overcome, crows. In like manner also omens of events are taken from beasts. For the meeting of a Weesel  is ominous, also meeting of a Hare is an ill omen to a traveller, unless she be taken. A Mule also is bad, because barren. A Hog is pernicious, for such is his nature, and therefore signifies pernicious men. A Horse betokens quarrellings, and fightings: whence Anchises seeing of white Horses, cries out in Virgil,
But when they are joyned together in a Chariot, because they draw with an equall yoke, they signifie that peace is to be hoped for. An Asse is an unprofitable creature, yet did Marius good, who when he was pronounced an enemy to his country, saw an Asse disdaining provender that was offered to him, and running to the water, by which Augury, he supposing he saw a way of safety shewed to him, intreated the aid of his friends, that they would convey him to the Sea; which being granted, he was set into a little ship, and so escaped the threats of Silla the Conqueror. If the Foal of an Asse meet any one going to an Augury, he signifies labor, patience, and hinderances. A Wolf meeting any one is a good sign, the effect whereof was seen in Hiero of Sicilia, from whom a Wolf snatching away a book whilest he was at school, confirmed to him the success of the Kingdom: but yet the Wolf makes him speechless whom he sees first. A Wolf rent in pieces a Watchman of P. Africanus, and C. Fulvius at Minturn, when the Romane Army was overcome by the fugitives in Sicilia. Also he signifies perfidious men, such as you can give no credit to: which was known in the progeny of Romanes. For the faith which they long since sucked from their mother the Wolf, and kept to themselves from the beginning, as by a certain law of nature, passed over to their posterity. To meet a Lion, seeing she is amongst Animals the strongest, and striking terrour into all the rest, is good. But for a woman to meet a Lionesse, is bad, because she hinders conception, for a Lionesse brings forth but once. To meet Sheep, and Goats is good. It is read also in the Ostentarian of the Tuscians, if this Animall shall wear any unusuall colour, it portends to the Emperour plenty of all things, together with much happiness. Whence Virgil to Pollio sings thus,
It is good also to meet Oxen treading out Corn, but better to meet them plowing, which although breaking the way hinder thy journey, yet by the favour of their Auspicium will recompence thee again. A Dog in a journey is fortunate, because Cyrus being cast into the woods was nourished by a Dog till he came to the Kingdom, which also the Angel, companion of Tobit did not scorn as a companion. The Castor, because he bites off his Testicles, and leaves them to the Hunters, is an ill omen, and portends that a man will injure himself. Also amongst small Animals, Mice signifie danger. For the same day that they did gnaw Gold in the Capitoll, both the Consuls were intercepted by Hannibal by way of ambush neer Tarentum. The Locust making a stand in any place, or burning the place, hinders one from their wishes, and is an ill omen; on the contrary the Grass-hoppers  promote a journey, and foretell a good event of things. The Spider weaving a line downwards, is said to signifie hope of money to come. Also the Pismires, because they know how to provide for themselves, and to prepare safe nests for themselves, portend security, and riches, a great Army. Hence, when the Pismires  had devoured a tame Dragon of Tiberius Caesar, it was advised, that he should take heed of the tumult of a multitude. If a Snake meet thee, take heed of an ill tongued enemy; For this Animall hath no power but in his mouth. A Snake creeping into Tiberius his pallace, portended his fall. Two Snakes were found in the bed of Sempronius Gracchus, wherefore a Soothsayer told him, if he would let the male, or the female escape, either he or his wife would shortly dye; he preferring the life of his wife, killed the male, and let the female escape, and within a few dayes he dyed. So a Viper signifies lewd women, and wicked children; and an Eel signifies a man displeased with every body: For she lives apart from all other fishes, nor is ever found in the company of any. But amongst all Auspicias  and omens, there is none more effectuall, and potent then man, none that doth signifie the truth more cleerly. Thou shalt therefore diligently note, and observe the condition of the man that meeteth thee, his age, profession, station, gesture, motion, exercise, complexion, habit, name, words, speech, and all such like things. For seeing there are in all other Animals so many discoveries of presages, without all question these are more efficacious, and cleer, which are infused into mans soul; which Tully  himself testifies, saying, that there is a certain Auspicium naturally in mens souls of their eternity, for the knowing of all the courses, and causes of things. In the foundation of the City of Rome the head of a man was found with his whole face, which did presage the greatness of the Empire, and gave the name to the Mountain of the Capitoll. The Brutian souldiers  fighting against Octavius, and M. Antonius, found an Aethiopian  in the gate of their Castle; whom though they did slay as a presage of ill success, yet they were unfortunate in the batle, and Brutus, and Cassius both Generals, were slain. Meeting of Monks is commonly accounted an ill omen, and so much the rather, if it be early in the morning, because these kind of men live for the most by the sudden death of men, as Vulturs  do by slaughters.
Auspicia, and Auguria, which foretell things to come by Animals, & birds, Orpheus the divine himself (as we read) did teach and shew first of all, which afterwards were had in great esteem with all Nations. Now they are verified by the light of naturall instinct, as if from this, some lights of divination may descend upon four-footed beasts, winged, and other Animals, by which they are able to presage to us of the events of things: which Virgil seems to be sensible of, when he sings,
Now this Instinct of nature, as saith William of Paris, is more sublime then all humane apprehension, and very neer, and most like to prophecy. By this instinct there is a certain wonderfull light of divination in some Animals naturally, as it manifestly appears in some Dogs, who know by this instinct theeves, and men, and finde them out, and apprehend them, falling upon them with a full mouth. By the like instinct Vulturs  foresee future slaughters in batles, and gather together into places where they shall be, as if they fore-saw the flesh of dead Carkases. By the same instinct Partridges  know their Dam, whichm they never saw and leave the Partridge which stole away her Dams Eggs, & sate upon them. By the same instinct also certain hurtful and terrible things are perceived (the soul of the men being altogether ignorant of them) whence terror, and horror ceaseth much upon men when they think nothing of these things. So a thief lying hid in any house, although no body knows, or thinks of his being there, strikes fear, and terror, and a troublesomeness of mind into the inhabitants of that house, although haply not of all, because the brightness of this instinct is not in all men; yet of some of them. So a harlot being hid in some very large house, is sometimes perceived to be there by some one that is altogether ignorant of her being there. It is mentioned in Histories that Heraiscus a certain Egyptian, a man of a divine nature, could discern unclean women, not only by his eyes, but by their voice, being heard afar off, and thereupon did fall into a most grievous headach. William of Paris also makes mention of a certain woman in his time, that by the same instinct perceived a man whom she loved, coming two miles off. Also he relates that in his time was a certain Stork convicted of unchastity by the smell of the male, who being judged guilty by a multitude of Storks whom the male gathered together, discovering to them the fault of his mate, was, her feathers being pulled off, torn in pieces by them. He also makes mention of a certain horse, who not knowing his dam, and leaping of  her, when afterwards he understood what he had done, bit off his own Stones  by way of revenge upon himself for his incest. The same doth Varro, Aristotle, and Pliny relate concerning horses. And Pliny makes mention of a certain Serpent, called the Asp, that did such a like thing, for she coming to a certain mans table in Egypt, was there daily fed, and she having brought forth some young, by one of which a son of her hosts was killed, after she knew of it, killed that young one, and would never return to that house any more. Now by these examples you see, how the lights of presage may descend upon some Animals, as signs, or marks of things, & are set in their gesture, motion, voice, flying, going, meat, colour, and such like. For according to the doctrine of the Platonists, there is a certain power put into inferiour things, by which for the most part they agree with the superiours; whence also the tacid consents of Animals seem to agree with divine bodies, and their bodies and affections to be affected with their powers, by the name of which they are ascribed to the Dieties. We must consider therefore what Animals are Saturnall, what are Joviall, and what Martiall, and so of the rest, and according to their properties to draw forth their presages: so those birds which resemble Saturn, and Mars, are all of them called terrible, and deadly, as the Scritch  Owl, the Hawlet, and others which we have mentioned before, also the horn Owl, because she is a Saturnall Solitary bird, also nightly, and is reputed to be most unfortunately ominous, of which the Poet saith,
But the Swan is a delicious bird, Venereall, and Dedicated to Phoebus, and is said to be most happy in her presages, especially in the Auspicias of Mariners, because she is never drowned in water, whence Ovid sings,
There are also some birds that presage with their mouth, and singing, as the Crow, Pie, Daw, whence Virgil,
Now the birds that portend future things by their flying are, viz Buzzards, the bone-Breakers, Eagles, Vulturs, Cranes, Swans, and the like: for they are to be considered in their flying, whether they fly slowly, or swiftly, whether to the right hand, or to the left, how many fly together: upon this account if Cranes fly apace, they signifie a tempest: when slowly, fair weather. Also when two Eagles fly together, they are said to portend evill, because that is a number of confusion. In like manner thou shalt enquire into the reason of the rest, as this is shewed of number. Moreover it belongs to an artist to observe a similitude in these conjectures, as in Virgil, Venus dissembling, teacheth her son Aeneas in these verses.
Most wonderful is that kind of Auguring of theirs, who hear, & understand the speeches of Animals, in which as amongst the Ancients, Melampus, and Tiresias, and Thales, and Apollonius the Tyanean, who as we read, excelled, and whom they report had excellent skill in the language of birds: of whom Philostratus, and Porphyrius  speak, saying, that of old when Apollonius sate in company amongst his friends, seeing Sparrows sitting upon a tree, and one Sparrow coming from elsewhere unto them, making a great chattering and noise, and then flying away, all the rest following him, he said to his companions, that that Sparrow told the rest that an Asse being burdened with wheat fell down in a hole neer the City, and that the wheat was scattered upon the ground: many being much moved with these words, went to see, and so it was, as Apollonius said, at which they much wondered. Also Porphyrius  the Platonist in his third book of Sacrifices, saith, that there was a Swallow: for it was certain, because every voice of any Animall is significative of some passion of its soul, as joy, sadness, or anger, or the like, which voices it is not so wonderfull a thing should be understood by men conversant about them. But Democritus himself declared this art, as saith Pliny, by naming the birds, of whose blood mixed together was produced a Serpent, of which whosoever did eat, should understand the voices of birds. And Hermes saith, if any one shall go forth to catch birds on a certain day of the Kalends of November, and shall boil the first bird which he catcheth, with the heart of a Fox, that all that shall eat of this bird, shall understand the voices of birds, and all other Animals. Also the Arabians say, that they can understand the meaning of bruits, who shall eat the heart, and liver of Dragons. Proclus also the Platonist believed, and wrote, that the heart of a Mole conduceth to presages. There were also divinations, and Auspicias which were taken from the inwards of sacrifices, the inventor whereof was Tages, of whom Lucan sang,
The Romane Religion thought that the liver was the head of the inwards. Hence the Sooth-sayers  enquiring after future things in the inwards, did first look into the liver, in which were two heads, whereof the one was called the head for the City, the other for the enemy; and the heads of this, or another part being compared together, they pronounced Victory, as we read in Lucan, that the inwards did signifie the slaughter of Pompeys men, and the Victory of Caesars, according to these verses,
Then the bowels being finished, they search the heart. Now if there were a sacrifice found without an heart, or a head was wanting in the Liver, these were deadly presages, and were called piacularia. Also if a sacrifice fled from the Altar, or being smitten, made a lowing, or fell upon any part of his body then he ought to do, it was the like ominous. We read that when Julius Caesar on a day went forth to procession with his purple Robe, and sitting in a golden chair, and sacrificing, there was twice a Heart wanting; And when C. Marius Utica was sacrificing, there was wanting a Liver. Also when Caius the prince, and M. Marcellus, C. Claudius, and L. Petellius Coss: were offering sacrifices, that the Liver was consumed away suddenly: and not long after, one of them dyed  of a disease, another was slain by men of Lyguria, the entrals  foretelling so much: which was thought to be done by the power of the Gods, or help of the divell: Hence it was accounted a thing of great concernment amongst the Ancients as oft as any thing unusuall was found in the inwards: as when Sylla was sacrificing at Laurentum, the figure of a Crown appeared in the head of the Liver: which Posthumius the Soothsayer interpreted to portend a Victory with a Kingdome, and therefore advised that Sylla should eat those entrals  himself. The colour also of the inwards is to be considered. Of these Lucan made mention.
There was in times past such a venerable esteem of these arts, that the most potent, and wise men sought after them, yea the Senate, and Kings did nothing without the Counsell of the Augures. But all these in these dayes, partly by the negligence of men, and partly by the authority of the Fathers, are abolished.
Now the Sooth-sayings of Flashes, and Lightenings, and of wonders, and how monstrous, and prodigious things are to be interpreted, the Prophets, and Priests of Hetruscus have taught the Art. For they have ordained sixteen Regions of the Heavens, and have ascribed Gods to every one of them; and besides eleven kinds of Lightenings, and nine Gods, which should dart them forth, by shewing rules for understanding the signification of them. But as often as Monstrous, prodigious, and wondrous things happen, they do presage, as is most certain, some great matter. Now their interpreter must be some excellent conjecturer of similitudes, as also some curious searcher, and of them who at that time are employed about the affairs of Princes, and Provinces. For the Celestials take such care only for Princes, peoples, and provinces, that before the rest they might be prefigured, and admonished, by Stars, by Constellations, by wonders, and by prodigies. Now if the same thing, or the like hath been seen in former Ages, we must consider that very thing, and what happened after that, and according to these, to fortell the same, or the like, because the same signs are for the same things, and the like for like. So prodigies have come before the birth, and death of many eminent men and Kings; as Cicero makes mention of Midas a boy, into whose mouth, whilest he was sleeping, the Pismire  put corns of Wheat, which was an omen of great riches. So Bees sate upon the mouth of Plato when he was sleeping in the Cradle, by which was foretold the sweetness of his speech. Hecuba, when she was bringing forth Paris, saw a burning Torch, which should set on fire Troy, and all Asia. There appeared unto the mother of Phalaris the image of Mercury pouring forth blood upon the earth, with which the whole house was over-flowed. The mother of Dionysius dreamed she brought forth a Satyr, which prodigious dreams the event that followed made good. The wife of Tarquinius Priscus seeing a flame lick the head of Servius Tullius, foretold that he should have the Kingdom. In like manner after Troy was taken, Aeneas disputing with Anchises his father concerning a flight, there appeared a flame licking the Crown of Ascanius his head, and doing of him no hurt: which thing, seeing it did portend the Kingdom to Ascanius, perswaded him to depart, for monstrous prodigies did fore-run great and eminent destruction. So we read in Pliny, that M. Attilius, and C. Portius being Consuls, it rained Milk, and Blood, which did presage that a very great Pestilence should the next yeer  over-spread Rome. Also in Lucania it rained spongious  Iron, & in the yeer before Marcus Crassus was slain in Parthia; with which also all the souldiers  of Lucania, being a very numerous Army, were slain. Also L. Paulus, and C. Marcellus being Consuls, it rained Wool about the Castle of Corisanum, neer which place a yeer  after T. Annius was slain by Milus. And in the wars of Denmark, the noise of Arms, and sound of a Trumpet was heard in the Aire. And Livie  concerning the Macedonian wars, saith, in the yeer when Annibil  dyed  it rained blood for two dayes. Also concerning the second punick war, he saith, that water mixed with blood came down from Heaven like rain, at that time when Annibal did spoil Italy. A little before the destruction of Leuctra the Lacedemonians heard a noise of Arms in the temple of Hercules, and at the same time in the temple of Hercules the doors that were shut with bars, opened themselves, and the arms that were hanged on the wall, were found on the ground. The like events may be prognosticated of other like things, as oftentimes in times past something hath been foretold of them. But concerning these also, the judgements of the Celestial influencies must not be neglected, of which we shall more largely treat in the following Chapters.
Moreover the Elements themselves teach us fatall events; whence those four famous kinds of Divinations, Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, and Pyromancy, have got their names, of which the Sorceress in Lucan seems to boast her self, when she saith,
The first therefore is Geomancy, which foresheweth future things by the motions of the earth, as also the noise, the swelling, the trembling, the chops, the pits, and exhalation, and other impressions, the art of which Almadel the Arabian sets forth. But there is another kind of Geomancy, which Divines by points written upon the earth, by a certain power in the fall of it, which is not of present speculation; but of that we shall speak hereafter.
Now Hydromancy doth perform its presages by the impressions of water, their ebbing and flowing, their increases, and depressions, their tempests, and colours, and the like; to which also are added visions, which are made in the waters. A kind of Divination found by the Persians, as Varro reports, a boy saw in the water the effigies of Mercury, which foretold in an hundred and fifty verses all the events of Mithridates his War. We read also that Numa Pompilius practiced Hydromancy; for in the water he called up the gods, and learned of them things to come. Which art also Pythagoras, a long time after Numa practised. There was of old a kind of Hydromancy, had in great esteem amongst the Assyrians, and it was called Lecanomancy, from a skin full of water, upon which they put plates of Gold, and Silver, and pretious  Stones, written upon with certain images, names, and characters. To this may be referred that art, by which Lead, and Wax being melted, and cast into the water, do express manifest marks of images, what we desire to know. There were also in former years Fountains that did foretell things to come, as the Fathers-Fountain at Achaia, and that which was called the water of Juno in Epidaurus; but of these more in the following Chapters, where we shall speak of Oracles.
Hither also may be referred the divination of Fishes, of which kind there was use made by the Lycians in a certain place, which was called Dina, neer the Sea, in a Wood dedicated to Apollo, made hollow in the dry sand, into which, he that went to consult of future things, let down roasted meat, and presently that place was filled with waters, and a great multitude of Fish, and of strange shapes, unknown to men, did appear, by the forms of which the Prophet foretold what should come to pass. These things doth Atheneus more at large relate out of Polycharmus, in the History of the Lycians.
After the same maner doth Aeromancy divine by airy impressions, by the blowing of the Winds, by Rainbows, by Circles about the Moon and Stars, by Mists, and Clouds, and by imaginations in Clouds, and visions in the Aire.
So also Pyromancy divines by fiery impressions, and by Stars with long Tailes, by fiery Colours, by visions, and imaginations in the fire. So the wife of Cicero foretold that he would be Consul the next year, because when a certain man after the Sacrifice was ended, would look in the ashes, there suddenly broke forth a flame. Of this kind are those that Pliny speaks of, that terrene, pale, and buzzing fires presage tempests, Circles about the snuffs of Candles betoken rain; if the flame fly turning, and winding, it portends wind. Also Torches when they strike the fire before them, and are not kindled. Also when a Coal sticks to Pots taken off from the fire, and when the fire casts off the ashes, and sparkles, or when ashes are hard grown together on the hearth, and when a Coal is very bright.
To these is added Capnomancy, so called from smoak, because it searcheth into the flame, and smoak, and thin colours, sounds, and motions, when they are carryed upright, or on one side, or round, which we read in these Verses in Statius.
Also in the Aethnean Caves, and Fields of the Nymphs in Apollonia, Auguries were taken from fires, and flames; joyful, if they did receive what was cast into them, and sad, if they did reject them. But of these things we shall speak in the following Chapters, amongst the answers of the Oracles.
The Arabian Philosophers agree, that some men may elevate themselves above the powers of their body, and above their sensitive powers; and those being surmounted, receive into themselves by the perfection of the Heavens, and Intelligencies, a divine vigour. Seeing therefore all the souls of men are perpetuall, and also all the spirits obey the perfect souls; Magicians think that perfect men may by the powers of their soul repair their dying bodies with other inferiour souls newly separated, and inspire them again; As a Weesell  that is killed, is made alive again by the breath, and cry of his Dam; And Lions make alive their dead Whelps by breathing upon them. And because, as they say, all like things being applyed to their like, are made of the same natures; and every patient, and thing that receives into it self the act of any agent, is endowed with the nature of that agent, and made con-naturall. Hence they think, that to this vivification, or making alive, some Hearbs, and Magicall confections, such as they say are made of the ashes of the Phoenix, and the cast skin of a Snake do much conduce, which indeed to many seems fabulous, and to some impossible, unless it could be accounted approved by an Historicall faith. For we read of some that have been drowned in water, others cast into the fire, and put upon the fire, others slain in war, others otherwise tryed, and after a few dayes were alive again, as Pliny testifies of Aviola, a man pertaining to the Consull, of L. Lamia, Cæius, Tubero, Corfidius, Gabienus, and many others. Also we read that Aesop the Tale-maker, Tindoreus, Hercules, and Palicy, the sons of Jupiter, and Thalia being dead, were raised to life again; also that many were by Physitians, and Magicians raised from death again, as the Historians relate of Aesculapius; and we have above mentioned out of Juba, and Xanthus, and Philostratus concerning Tillo, and a certain Arabian, and Apollonius the Tyanean. Also we read that Glaucus, a certain man that was dead, whom they say, beyond all expectation, the Physitians  coming to see it, the hearb  Dragon-wort restored to life. Some say that he revived by the puting into his body a medicine made of Honey, whence the proverb, Glaucus was raised from death by taking in Honey into his body. Apuleius also relating the manner of these kinds of restorings to life, saith of Zachla the Egyptian prophet: The prophet being thus favourable, layes a certain Hearb  upon the mouth of the body of a young man being dead, and another upon his brest, then turning towards the East, or rising of the propitious Sun, praying silently (a great assembly of people striving to see it) in the first place heaved up his brest, then makes a beating in his veines, then his body to be filled with breath, after which the Carkase ariseth, and the young man speaks. If these things are true, the dying souls must, sometimes lying hid in their bodies, be oppressed with vehement extasies, and be freed from all bodily action: So that the life, sense, motion, forsake the body, and so, that the man is not yet truly dead, but lies astonied, and as it were dead for a certain time. And this is often found, that in times of Pestilence many that are carried for dead to the graves to be buryed, revive again. The same also hath often befeln women, by reason of fits of the Mother. And Rabbi Moises out of the book of Galen, which Patriarcha translated, makes mention of a man, who was suffocated for six dayes, and did neither eat nor drink, and his arteries became hard. And it is said in the same book, that a certain man by being filled with Water, lost the pulse of his whole body, so that the heart was not perceived to move, and he lay like a dead man. Also it is said that a man by reason of a fal  from a high place, or great noise, or long staying under the Water, may fall into a swoun, which may continue fourty eight  hours, and so lye as if he were dead, his face being very green. And in the same place there is mention made of a man that buried a man that seemed to be dead seventy two hours after his seeming decease, and so killed him, because he buried him alive, and there are given signs whereby it may be known who are alive; although they seem to be dead, and indeed will dye, unless there be some means used to recover them, as Phlebotomy, or some other cure. And these are such as very seldom happen. This is the manner, by which we understand Magicians, and Physitians  do raise dead men to life, as they that were tryed by the stinging of Serpents, were by the Nation of the Marsi, and the Psilli restored to life. Now we may conceive that such kind of extasies  may continue a long time, although a man be not truly dead, as it is in Dor-mice, and Crocodiles, and many other Serpents, which sleep all Winter, and are in such a dead sleep, that they can scarce be awakened with fire. And I have often seen a Dormouse dissected, and continue immovable, as if she were dead, untill she was boyled, and when presently in boyling  the water the dissected members did shew life. Also, although it be hard to be believed, we read in some approved Historians, that some men have slept for many yeers together, and in the time of sleep, untill they awaked, there was no alteration in them, as to make them seem older: The same doth Pliny testifie of a certain boy, whom he saith, being wearied with heat, and his journey, slept fifty seven yeers in a Cave. We read also that Epimenides Gnosius slept fifty seven yeers in a Cave. Hence the proverb arose, To outsleep Epimenides. M. Damascenus tels, that in his time a certain country man being wearied in Germany, slept for the space of a whole Autumn, and the Winter following, under a heap of hay, untill the Summer, when the hay began to be eaten up, then he was found awakened as a man halfe dead, and out of his wits. Eclesiasticall  Histories confirm this opinion concerning the seven sleepers, whom they say slept  yeers. There was in Norvegia a Cave in a high Sea shore, where, as Paulus Diaconus, and Methodius the Martyr write, seven men lay sleeping a long time without corruption, and the people that went in to disturb them were contracted, or drawn together, so that after a while, being forewarned by that punishment, they durst not hurt them. Now Xenocrates, a man of no mean repute amongst Philosophers was of opinion, that this long sleeping was appointed by God as a punishment for some certain sins. But Marcus Damascenus proves it by many reasons to be possible, and naturall, neither doth he think it irrationall, that some should without meat, and drink, and avoyding excrements, without consuming, or corruption, sleep many moneths. And this may befall a man by reason of some poisonous potion, or sleepy disease, or such like causes, for certain dayes, moneths, or years, according to the intention, or remission of the power of the medicine, or of the passions of their mind. And Physitians  say that there are some Antidotes, of which they that take too great a potion, shall be able to endure hunger a long time, as Elias in former time being fed with a certain food by an Angell, walked, and fasted in the strength of that meat, fourty  dayes. And John Bocatius makes mention of a man in his time, in Venice, who would every yeer fast four dayes without any meat. But that was a greater wonder, that there was a woman in lower Germany at the same time, who took no food till the thirteenth yeer of her age, which to us may seem incredible, but that he lately confirmed it; as also he tels of a Miracle of our Age, that his brother Nicolaus Stone, an Helvetian by Nation, who lived twenty yeers in the wilderness without meat, till he dyed. That also is wonderfull which Theophrastus mentions concerning a certain man, called Philinus, who used no meat, or drink, besides Milk. And there are grave Authors who describe a certain hearb  of Sparta, with which they say the Scythians can endure twelve dayes hunger, without meat or drink, if they do but tast  it, or hold it in their mouth.
There is also a certain kind of Divination by Dreams, confirmed by the traditions of Philosophers, the authorities of Divines, the examples of Histories, and daily experience. A Dreams I call here, not vain Dreams, or idle imaginations: for those are vain, and have no Divination in them, but arise from the remains of watchings, and disturbance of the body. For as the mind is taken up about, and wearied with cares, it suggests it self to him that is asleep. I call that a Dream here, which is caused by the Celestiall influences in the phantastick spirit, mind, or body, being all well disposed. The rule of interpreting this is found amongst Astrologers, in that part which is wrote concerning questions; but yet that is not sufficient, because these kind of Dreams come by use to divers men after a divers manner, and according to the divers quality, and dispositions of the phantastick spirit: wherefore there cannot be given one common rule to all for the interpretation of Dreams. But according to the opinion of Synesius, seeing there are the same accidents to things, and like befall like; so be which hath often fallen upon the same visible thing, hath assigned to himself the same opinion, passion, fortune, action, event, and as Aristotle saith, the memory is confirmed by sence, and by keeping in memory the same thing knowledge is obtained, as also by the knowledge of many experiences, by little, & little, arts, and sciences are obtained. After the same account you must conceive of Dreams. Whence Synesius commands that every one should observe his Dreams, and their events, and such like rules, viz to commit to memory all things that are seen, and accidents that befall, as well in sleep, as in watching, and with a diligent observation consider with himself the rules by which these are to be examined, for by this means shall a Diviner be able by little, and little to interpret his Dreams, if so be nothing slip out of his memory. Now Dreams are more efficacious, when the Moon over-runs that Sign, which was in the ninth number of the Nativity, or revolution of that yeer, or in the ninth Sign from the Sign of perfection. For it is a most true, and certain divination, neither doth it proceed from nature or humane Arts, but from purified minds, by divine inspiration. We shall now discuss, and examine that which belongs to prophecyings, and oracles.
It happens also sometimes, that not only they that are asleep, but also they that are watchfull do with a kind of instigation of minde, Divine, which Divination Aristotle cals ravishment, or a kind of madness, and teacheth that it proceeds from a melancholy humor, saying in his Treatise of divination: Melancholy men, by reason of their earnestness, do far better conjecture, and quickly conceive a habit, and most easily receive an impression of the Celestials. And in his Problemes saith, that the Sibyls, and the Bacchides, and Niceratus the Syracusan, and Amon, were by their naturall Melancholy complexion Prophets, and Poets. The cause therefore of this madness, if it be any thing within the body, is a melancholy humor, not that which they call black choller, which is so obstinate, and terrible a thing, that the violence of it is said by Physitians, and Naturall Phylosophers, besides madness, which it doth induce, also to entice evill spirits to seize upon mens bodies. Therefore we understand a melancholy humor here, to be a naturall, and white choller. For this, when it is stirred up, burns, and stirs up a madness conducing to knowledge, and divination, especially if it be helped by any Celestiall influx, especially of Saturn, who seeing he is cold, and dry, as is a melancholy humor, hath his influence upon it, increaseth, and preserveth it. Besides, seeing he is the Author of secret contemplation, and estranged from all publike  affairs, and the highest of all the planets, doth alwaies as with call his mind from outward businesses, so also makes it ascend higher, and bestows upon him the knowledge, and passages of future things. And this is Aristotles meaning in his book of Problemes. By Melancholy, saith he, some men are made as it were divine, foretelling things to come, and some men are made Poets. He saith also, that all men that were excellent in any Science, were for the most part melancholy. Democritus, and Plato attest the same, saying, that there were some melancholy men, that had such excellent wits, that they were thought, and seemed to be more divine then humane. So also there have been many melancholy men at first rude, ignorant, and untractable, as they say Hesiod, Ion, Tynnichus, Calcinenses, Homer, and Lucretius were, who on a suddain were taken with a madness, and became Poets, and prophecied wonderfull, and divine things, which they themselves scarce understood. Whence divine Plato in Ion saith, many Prophets, after the violence of their madness was abated, do not well understand what they wrote, yet treated acurately  of each Art in their madness, as all Artists by reading of them judge. So great also they say the power of melancholy is of, that by its force, Celestiall spirits also are sometimes drawn into mens bodies, by whose presence, and instinct, antiquity testifies men have been made drunk, and spake most wonderful things. And that they think happens under a threefold  difference, according to a threefold apprehension of the soul, viz imaginative, rationall, and mentall. They say therefore, when the mind is forced with a melancholy humor, nothing moderating the power of the body, and passing beyond the bonds of the members, is wholly carried into imagination, and doth suddenly become a seat for inferior spirits, by whom it oftentimes receives wonderfull wayes, and forms of manuall Arts. So we see that any most ignorant man doth presently become an excellent painter, or contrivers of building, and to become a master in any such Art. But when these kinds of spirits portend to us future things, they shew those things which belong to the disturbing of the Elements, and changes of times, as rain, tempests, innundations, earthquakes, great mortality, famine, slaughter, and the like. As we read in Aulus Gelius, that Cornelius Patarus his Priest did at the time, when Cesar, and Pompey were to fight in Thessalia, being taken with a madness, foretell the time, order, and issue of the battell. But when the mind is turned wholly into reason, it becomes a receptacle for midle  spirits. Hence it obtains the knowledge, and understanding of natural, and humane things. So we see that a man sometimes doth on a suddain become a Philosopher, Physitian, or an excellent Orator, and foretels  mutations of Kingdomes, and restitutions of Ages, and such things as belong to them, as the Sybill  did to the Romanes; but when the mind is wholly elevated into the understanding, then it becomes a receptacle of sublime spirits, and learns of them the secrets of divine things, such as the Law of God, the orders of Angels, and such things as belong to the knowledge of things eternall, and salvation of souls. It foresees things which are appointed by Gods speciall predestination, as future prodigies, or miracles, the prophet to come, and the changing of the law. So the Sybills  Prophecyed of Christ a long time before his coming. So Virgil understanding that Christ was at hand, and remembring what the Sybill  Cumaea had said, sang thus to Pollio.
There are also some prognosticks, which are in the midle, betwixt naturall, and supernaturall divination, as in those who are neer to death, and being weakened with old Age, do sometimes foresee things to come, because as saith Plato, by how much the more men are less hindred by their sence, so much the more acurately they understand, and because they are neerer to the place whither they must go, and their bonds being as it were a little loosed, seeing they are no more subject to the body, easily perceive the light of divine revelation.
It is the opinion of some Divines, That God did not immediately creat  the body of man, but by the assistance of the heavenly Spirits compound, and frame him; which opinion Alchinous, and Plato favor; thinking that God is the chief Creator of the whole world, of spirits both good and bad, and therefore immortalized them: but that all kinds of mortall animals were made at the command of God; for if he should have created them, they must have been immortall. The spirits therefore mixing Earth, Fire, Aire, and Water together, made of them all, put together, one body, which they subjected to the service of the soul, assigning in it severall Provinces to each power thereof, to the meaner of them, mean and low places: as to Anger the Midriff, to Lust the Womb, but to the more noble senses the Head, as the Tower of the whole body, and then the manifold Organs of Speech. They divide the Sense into External, and Internall. The externall are divided into five, known to every one, to which there are allotted five Organs, or subjects, as it were Foundations; being so ordered, that they which are placed in the more eminent part of the body, have a greater degree of purity. For the Eyes placed in the uppermost place, are the most pure, and have an affinity with the Nature of Fire, and Light: then the Ears have the second order of place, and purity, and are compared to the Aire: the Nostrils have the third order, and have a middle nature betwixt the Aire, and the Water; then the Organ of tasting, which is grosser and most like to the nature of Water: Last of all, the touching is diffused through the whole body, and is compared to the grossness of Earth. The more pure senses are those which perceive their Objects farthest off, as Seeing, and Hearing, then the Smelling, then the Tast, which doth not perceive but those that are nigh. But the touch perceives both wayes, for it perceives bodies nigh; and as Sight discerns by the medium of the Aire, so the touch perceives by the medium of a stick or pole, bodies Hard, Soft, and Moist. Now the touch only is common to all animals. For it is most certain that man hath this sense, and in this, and tast  he excels all other animals, but in the other three he is excelled by some animals, as by a Dog, who Hears, Sees, and Smels  more acutely then Man, and the Linx, and Eagles see more acutely then all other Animals, & Man. Now the interior senses are, according to Averrois, divided into four, whereof the first is called Common sence, because it doth first collect, and perfect all the representations which are drawn in by the outward senses. The second is the imaginative power, whose office is, seeing it represents nothing, to retain those representations which are received by the former senses, and to present them to the third faculty of inward sense, which is the phantasie, or power of judging, whose work is also to perceive, and judge by the representations received, what or what kind of thing that is of which the representations are, and to commit those things which are thus discerned, and adjudged, to the memory to be kept. For the vertues thereof in generall, are discourse, dispositions, persecutions, and flights, and stirrings up to action: but in particular, the understanding of intellectuals, vertues, the manner of Discipline, Counsel, Election. And this is that which shews us future things by dreams: whence the Fancy is sometimes named the Phantasticall Intellect. For it is the last impression of the understanding; which, as saith Iamblicus, is belonging to all the powers of the mind, and forms all figures, resemblances of species, and operations, and things seen, and sends forth the impressions of other powers unto others: And those things which appear by sence, it stirs up into an opinion, but those things which appear by the Intellect, in the second place it offers to opinion, but of it self it receives images from all, and by its property, doth properly assign them, according to their assimilation, forms all the actions of the soul, and accommodates the externall to the internall, and impresses the body with its impression. Now these senses have their Organs in the head, for the Common sence, and imagination take up the two former Cels  of the brain, although Aristotle placeth the Organ of the Common sence  in the heart, but the cogitative power possesseth the highest, and middle part of the head; and lastly, the memory the hinmost part thereof. Moreover, the Organs of Voice, and Speech are many, as the inward muscles of the breast betwixt the ribs, the breasts, the lungs, the arteries, the windpipe, the bowing of the Tongue, and all those parts and muscles that serve for breathing. But the proper Organ of Speech is the Mouth, in which are framed words, and speeches, the Tongue, the Teeth, the Lips, the Palate, &c. Above the sensible soul, which expresseth its powers by the Organs of the body, the incorporeall mind possesseth the highest place, and it hath a double nature, the one, which inquireth into the causes, properties, and progress of those things which are contained in the order of nature, and is content in the contemplation of the truth, which is therefore called the contemplative intellect. The other is a power of the mind, which discerning by consulting what things are to be done, and what things to be shunned, is wholly taken up in consultation, and action, and is therefore ealled the Active Intellect. This Order of powers therefore nature ordained in man, that by the externall sences  we might know corporeall things, by the internall the representations of bodies, as also things abstracted by the mind and intellect, which are neither bodies, nor any thing like them. And according to this threefold order of the powers of the soul, there are three appetites in the soul: The first is naturall, which is an inclination of nature into its end, as of a stone downward, which is in all stones: another is animal, which the sense follows, and it is divided into irascible, and concupiscible: the third is intellective, which is called the will, differing from the sensitive, in this, the sensitive is of it self, of those things, which may be presented to the senses, desiring, nothing unless in some manner comprehended. But the will, although it be of it self, of all things that are possible, yet because it is free by its essence, it may be also of things that are impossible, as it was in the Devil, desiring himself to be equall with God, and therefore is altered and depraved with pleasure and continuall anguish, whilest it assents to the inferiour powers. Whence from its depraved appetite there arise four passions in it, with which in like manner the body is affected sometimes. Whereof the first is called Oblectation, which is a certain quietness or assentation of the mind or will, because it obeys, and not willingly consents to that pleasantness which the senses hold forth; which is therefore defined to be an inclination of the mind to an effeminate pleasure. The second is called effusion, which is a remission of, or dissolution of the power, viz when beyond the oblectation the whole power of the mind, and intention of the present good is melted, and diffuseth it self to enjoy it. The third is vaunting, and loftiness, thinking it self to have attained to some great good, in the enjoyment of which it prides it self and glorieth. The fourth and the last is Envy, or a certain kind of pleasure or delight at another mans harm, without any advantage to it self. It is said to be without any advantage to it self, because if any one should for his own profit rejoyce at an other mans harm, this would be rather out of love to himself, then out of ill wil  to another. And these four passions arising from a depraved appetite for pleasure, the grief or perplexity it self doth also beget so many contrary passions, as Horror, Sadness, Fear, and Sorrow at anothers good, without his own hurt, which we call Envy, i.e. Sadness at anothers prosperity, as pity is a certain kind of sadness at anothers misery.
The passions of the mind are nothing else but certain motions or inclinations proceeding from the apprehension of any thing, as of good or evill, convenient or inconvenient. Now these kind of apprehensions are of three sorts, viz, Sensual, Rationall, and Intellectuall. And according to these three, are three sorts of passions in the Soul; For when they follow the sensitive apprehension, then they respect a temporall good or evill, under the notion of profitable, or unprofitable, delightfull and offensive, and are called naturall, or animall passions. When they follow the rational apprehension, and so respect good or bad, under the notions of Vertue or Vice, praise or disgrace, profitable or unprofitable, honest or dishonest, they are called rationall, or voluntary passions. When they follow the Intellectuall apprehension, and respect good or bad, under the notion of just or unjust, true or false, they are called intellectuall passions, or synderesis. Now the subject of the passions of the soul, is the concupitive power of the soul, and is divided into concupiscible, and irascible, and both respect good and bad, but under a different notion. For when the concupiscible power respects good, and evil absolutely; Love or Lust, or on the contrary, hatred is caused: When it respects good, as absent, so desire is caused; or evill, as absent, or at hand, and so is caused horror, flying from, or loathing: or if it respect good, as present, then there is caused delight, mirth, or pleasure; but if evill, as present, then sadness, anxiety, grief. But the irascible power respects good or bad, under the notion of some difficulty; to obtain the one, or avoid the other, and this sometimes with confidence: and so there is caused Hope or Boldness; but when with diffidency, then Despair, and Fear. But when that irascible power riseth into revenge, and this be onely about some evill past, as it were of injury or hurt offered, there is caused Anger. And so we find eleven passions in the mind, which are, Love, Hatred, Desire, Horror, Joy, Grief, Hope, Despair, Boldness, Fear, and Anger.
The Phantasie, or imaginative power hath a ruling power over the passions of the soul, when they follow the sensuall apprehension. For this doth of its own power, according to the diversity of the Passions, First of all change the proper body with a sensible transmutation, by changing the Accidents in the body, and by moving the spirit upward or downward, inward, or outward, and by producing divers qualities in the members. So in joy, the spirits are driven outward, in fear, drawn back, in bashfulness, are moved to the brain. So in joy, the heart is dilated outward, by little and little, in sadness, is constringed by little, and little inward. After the same manner in anger or fear, but suddenly. Again anger, or desire of revenge produceth heat, redness, a bitter tast, and a looseness. Fear induceth cold, trembling of the heart, speechlessness, and paleness. Sadness causeth sweat, and a blewish  whiteness. Pitty, which is a kind of sadness, doth often ill affect the body of him that takes pitty, that it seems to be the body of another man affected. Also it is manifest, that amongst some lovers there is such a strong tye  of love, that what the one suffers, the other suffers. Anxiety induceth dryness, and blackness. And how great heats love stirs up in the Liver, and pulse, Physitians  know, discerning by that kind of judgement the name of her that is beloved, in an Heroick Passion. So Naustratus knew that Antiochus was taken with the love of Stratonica. It is also manifest that such like Passions, when they are most vehement, may cause death. And this is manifest to all men, that with too much joy, sadness, love, hatred, men many times dye, and are sometimes freed from a disease. So we read, that Sophocles, and Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant, did both suddenly dye  at the news of a Tragicall victory. So a certain woman seeing her son returning from the Canensian battle, dyed  suddenly. Now what sadness can do, is known to all. We know that Dogs oftentimes dye  with sadness for the death of their masters. Sometimes also by reason of these like Passions, long diseases follow, and are sometimes cured. So also some men looking from an high place, by reason of great fear, tremble, are dim-sighted, and weakened, and sometimes loose their senses. So fears, and falling-sickness, sometimes follow sobbing. Sometimes wonderfull effects are produced, as in the son of Cræsus, whom his mother brought forth dumb, yet a vehement fear, and ardent affection made him speak, which naturally he could never do. So with a suddain fall oftentimes life, sense, or motion on a suddain leave the members, and presently again are sometimes returned. And how much vehement anger, joyned with great audacity, can do, Alexander the great shews, who being circumvented with a battle in India, was seen to send forth from himself lightening  and fire. The Father of Theodoricus is said to have sent forth out of his body, sparks of fire; so that sparkling flames did leap out with a noyse. And such like things sometimes appear in beasts, as in Tiberius his horse, which is said to send forth a flame out of his mouth.
The foresaid Passions sometimes alter the body by way of imitation, the reason of the vertue which the likeness of the thing hath to change it, which power the vehement imagination moves, as in setting the teeth on edge at the sight or hearing of something, or because we see or imagine another to eat sharp or soure things; So he which sees another gape, gapes also; and some when they hear any one name soure things, their tongues waxeth tart. Also the seeing of any filthy thing causeth nauseousness. Many at the sight of mans blood fall into a swoun. Some when they see bitter meat given to any, perceive a bitter spitle  in their mouth. And William of Paris saith, that he saw a man, that at the sight of a medicine, went to stool as oft as he pleased; when as neither the substance of the medicine, nor the odour, nor the tast  of it came to him: but only a kind of resemblance was apprehended by him. Upon this account some that are in a dream think they burn, and are in a fire, and are fearfully tormented, as if they did truly burn, when as the substance of the fire is not neer them, but only a resemblance apprehended by their imagination. And sometimes mens bodies are transformed, and transfigured, and also transported, and this oft-times when they are in a dream, and sometimes when they are awake. So Cyprus after he was chosen King of Italy, did very much wonder at, and meditate upon the sight, and victory of Buls, and in the thought thereof did sleep a whole night, but in the morning was found horned, no otherwise then by the vegetative power being stirred up by a vehement imagination, elevating corniferous humors into his head, and producing horns. For a vehement cogitation, whilest it vehemently moves the species, pictures out the figure of the thing thought on, which they represent in their blood, and the blood impresseth from it self, on the members that are nourished by it, as upon those of the same body, so upon those of anothers. As the imagination of a woman with child impresseth the mark of the thing longed for upon her infant, and the imagination of a man bit with a mad Dog, impresseth upon his Urine the image of Dogs. So men may grow grey on a suddain. And some by the dream of one night, have grown up from boies  into perfect men. Hitherto may be referred those many scarrs of King Dagobertus, and Marks of Franciscus, which they received, the one whilest he was afraid of correction, the other whilest he did wonderfully meditate upon the wounds of Christ. So, many are transported from place to place, passing over rivers, fires and unpassable places, viz when the species of any vehement desire, or fear, or boldness are impressed upon their spirits, and, being mixed with vapors, do move the Organ of the touch in their original, together with phantasie, which is the original of locall motion. Whence they stir up the members, and Organs of motion to motion, and are moved without any mistake unto the imagined place, not out of sight, but from the interiour fantasy. So great a power is there of the soul upon the body, that which way soever that imagines, and dreams that it goes, thither doth it lead the body. We read many other examples by which the power of the soul upon the body is wonderfully explained, as is that which Avicen describes of a certain man, who when he pleased could affect his body with the palsie. They report of Gallus Vibius, that he did fall into madness, not casually, but on purpose: for whilest he did imitate mad men, he assimilated their madness to himself, and became mad indeed. And Austin  makes mention of some men who would move their ears at their pleasure, and some that would move the crown of their head to their forehead, and could draw it back again when they pleased: and of another that could sweat at his pleasure. And it is well known, that some can weep at their pleasure, and pour forth abundance of tears: and that there are some that can bring up what they have swallowed, when they please, as out of a bag, by degrees. And we see that in these dayes there are many who can so imitate, and express the voices of Birds, Cattle, Dogs, and some men, that they can scarce at all be discerned. Also Pliny relates by divers examples, that women have been turned into men. Pontanus testifieth, that in his time, a certain woman called Caietava, and another called Aemilia, who after many years, after they were married, were changed into men. Now how much imagination can do upon the soul, no man is ignorant: for it is neerer to the substance of the soul then the sense is; wherefore it acts more upon the soul then the sense doth. So women by certain strong imaginations, dreams, and suggestions brought in by certain Magicall Arts do oftentimes bind them into a strong loving of any one. So they say that Medea only by a dream, burnt in love towards Jason. So the soul sometimes is by a vehement imagination, or speculation altogether abstracted from the body, as Celsus relates of a certain Presbyter, who as oft as he pleased, could make himself senseless, and lie like a dead man, that when any one pricked, or burnt him, he felt no pain, but lay without any motion or breathing, yet he could, as he said, hear mens voices as it were afar off, if they cryed out aloud. But of these abstractions we shall discourse more fully in the following Chapters.
The Passions of the Soul which follow the phantasie, when they are most vehement, cannot only change their own body, but also can transcend so, as to work upon another body, so that some wonderfull impressions are thence produced in Elements, and extrinsecall things, and also can so take away, or bring some disease of the mind or body. For the Passions of the Soul are the chiefest cause of the temperament of its proper body. So the Soul being strongly elevated, and inflamed with a strong imagination, sends forth health or sickness, not only in its proper body, but also in other bodies. So Avicen is of the opinion, that a Camell may fall by the imagination of any one. So he which is bitten with a mad Dog presently fals into a madness, and there appear in his Urine the shapes of Dogs. So the longing of a woman with Child, doth act upon anothers body, when it Signs the infant in the womb with the mark of the thing longed for. So, many monstrous generations proceed from monstrous imaginations of women with Child, as Marcus Damascenus reports that at Petra Sancta, a Town scituated  upon the territories of Pisa, viz a wench that was presented to Charls  King of Bohemia, who was rough and hairy all over her body, like a wild beast, whom her mother affected with a religious kind of horrour  upon the picture of John Baptist, which was by her bed, in time of conception, afterwards brought forth after this fashion. And this we see is not only in men, but also is done amongst bruit  Creatures. So we read that Jacob the Patriarch, with his speckled Rods set in the watering places, did discolour the Sheep of Laban. So the imaginative powers of Pea-Cocks, and other Birds, whilest they be coupling, impress a colour upon their wings. Whence we produce white Pea-Cocks, by hanging round the places where they couple, with white Clothes. Now by these examples it appears how the affection of the phantasie, when it vehemently intends it self, doth not only affect its own proper body, but also anothers. So also the desire of Witches to hurt, doth bewitch men most perniciously with stedfast  lookes. To these things Avicen, Aristotle, Algazel, and Gallen assent. For it is manifest that a body may most easily be affected with the vapour of anothers diseased body, which we plainly see in the Plague, and Leprosie. Again, in the vapours of the eyes there is so great a power, that they can bewitch and infect any that are near them, as the Cockatrice, or Basilisk, killing men with their looks. And certain women in Scythia, amongst the Illyrians, and Triballi, killed whomsoever they looked angry upon. Therefore let no man wonder that the body, and soul of one may in like manner be affected with the mind of another, seeing the mind is far more powerfull, strong, fervent, and more prevalent in its motion then vapours exhaling out of bodies; neither are there wanting Mediums, by which it should work, neither is anothers body less subjected to anothers mind, then to anothers body. Upon this account they say, that a man by him affection, and habit only, may act upon another. Therefore Philosophers advise, that the society of evill, and mischievous men must be shunned, for their soul being full of noxious rayes, infects them that are near with a hurtfull Contagion. On the contrary, they advise that the society of good, and fortunate men be endeavored after, because by their nearness they do us much good. For as the smell of Assa-fetida, or Musk, so of bad something of bad, of good something of good, is derived upon them that are nigh, and sometimes continues a long time. Now then if the foresaid Passions have so great a power in the Phantasie, they have certainly a greater power in the reason, in as much as the reason is more excellent then the Phantasie; and lastly, they have much greater power in the mind; for this, when it is fixt upon God for any good with its whole intention, doth oftentimes affect anothers body as well as its own with some divine gift. By this means we read that many miracles were done by Apollonius, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Philolaus, and many Prophets, and holy men of our Religion.
The Passions of the mind are much helped, and are helpfull, and become most powerfull by vertue of the Heaven, as they agree with the heaven, either by any naturall agreement, or by voluntary Election. For, as saith Ptolomeus, he which chooseth that which is the better, seems to differ nothing from him who hath this of nature. It conduceth therefore very much for the receiving of the benefit of the Heavens, in any work, if we shall by the Heaven make our selves sutable  to it in our thoughts, affections, imaginations, elections, deliberations, contemplations, and the like. For such like passions do vehemently stir up our spirit to their likeness, and suddenly expose us, and ours to the superior significators of such like passions; and also by reason of their dignity, and neerness to the superiors, do much more partake of the Celestials, then any materiall things. For our mind can through imaginations, or reason by a kind of imitation, be so conformed to any Star, as suddenly to be filled with the vertues of that Star, as if it were a proper receptacle of the influence thereof. Now the contemplating mind, as it withdraws it self from all sense, imagination, nature, and deliberation, and cals  it self back to things separated, unless it exposeth it self to Saturn, is not of present consideration, or enquiry. For our mind doth effect divers things by faith, which is a firm adhesion, a fixt intention, and a vehement application of the worker, or receiver, to him that co-operates in any thing, and gives power to the work which we intend to do. So that there is made as it were in us the image of the vertue to be received, and the thing to be done in us, or by us. We must therefore in every work, and application of things, affect vehemently, imagine, hope, and believe strongly, for that will be a great help. And it is verified amongst Physitians, that a strong belief, and an undoubted hope, and love towards the Physitian, and medicine, conduce much to health, yea more sometimes than the medicine it self. For the same that the efficacy, and vertue of the medicine works, the same doth the strong imagination of the Physitian  work, being able to change the qualities in the body of the sick, especially when the patient placeth much confidence in the Physitian, by that means disposing himself for the receiving of the vertue of the Physitian, and Physick. Therefore he that works in Magick, must be of a constant belief, be credulous, and not at all doubt of obtaining the effect. For as a firm, and strong belief doth work wonderfull things, although it be in false works, so distrust and doubting doth dissipate, and break the vertu  of the mind of the worker, which is the medium betwixt both extreams, whence it happens, that he is frustrated of the desired influence of the superiors, which could not be joyned, and united to our labours without a firm, and solid vertue of our mind.
The Philosophers, especially the Arabians, say, that mans mind, when it is most intent upon any work, through its passion, and effects, is joyned with the mind of the Stars, and Intelligencies, and being so joyned is the cause of some wonderfull vertue be infused into our works, and things; and this, as because there is in it an apprehension, and power of all things, so because all things have a naturall obedience to it, and of necessity an efficacy, and more to that which desires them with a strong desire. And according to this is verified the Art of Characters, images, inchantments, and some speeches, and many other wonderfull experiments to every thing which the mind affects. By this means whatsoever the mind of him that is in vehement love affects, hath an efficacy to cause love, & whatsoever the mind of him that strongly hates, dictates, hath an efficacy to hurt, and destroy. The like is in other things, which the mind affects with a strong desire. For all those things which the mind acts, and dictates by Characters, Figures, Words, Speeches, Gestures, and the like, help the appetite of the soul, and acquire certain wonderfull vertues, as from the soul of the operator, in that hour when such a like appetite doth invade it, so from the opportunity, and Celestiall influence, moving the mind in that manner. For our mind, when it is carried upon the great excess of any Passion, or vertue, oftentimes presently takes of it self a strong, better, and more convenient hour, or opportunity. Which Thomas Aquinas in his third book against the Gentiles, confesseth. So many wonderfull vertues both cause, and follow certain admirable operations by great affections, in those things which the soul doth dictate in that hour to them. But know, that such kind of things confer nothing, or very little but to the Author of them, and to him which is inclined to them, as if he were the Author of them. And this is the manner by which their efficacy is found out. And it is a generall rule in them, that every mind that is more excellent in its desire, and affection, makes such like things more fit for it self, as also efficatious to that which it desires. Every one therefore that is willing to work in Magick, must know the vertue, measure, order, and degree of his own soul, in the power of the universe.
There is also a certain vertue in the minds of men, of changing, attracting, hindring, and binding to that which they desire, and all things obey them, when they are carried into a great excess of any Passion or vertu, so as to exceed those things which they bind. For the superior binds that which is inferior, and converts it to it self, and the inferior is by the same reason converted to the superior, or is otherwise affected, and wrought upon. By this reason things that receive a superior degree of any Star, bind, or attract, or hinder things which have an inferior, according as they agree, or disagree amongst themselves. Whence a Lion is afraid of a Cock, because the presence of the Solary vertue is more agreeable to a Cock then to a Lion: So a Loadstone draws Iron, because in order it hath a superior degree of the Celestiall Bear.
So the Diamond hinders the Loadstone, because in the order of Mars it is superior to it. In like manner any man when he is opportunely exposed to the Celestiall influencies, as by the affections of his mind, so by the due applications of naturall things, if he become stronger in a Solary vertue, binds and draws the inferior into admiration, and obedience, in order of the Moon to servitude or infirmities, in a Saturnall order to quietness or sadness; in order of Jupiter to worship, in order of Mars to fear, and discord, in order of Venus to love, and joy, in a Mercuriall order to perswasion, and obsequiousness, and the like. Now the ground of such a kind of binding is the very vehement, and boundless affection of the souls, with the concourse of the Celestiall order. But the dissolutions, or hinderances of such a like binding, are made by a contrary effect, and that more excellent or strong, for as the greater excess of the mind binds, so also it looseth, and hindreth. And lastly, when the  fearest Venus, oppose Saturn. When Saturn or Mars, oppose Venus or Jupiter: for Astrologers say, that these are most at enmity, and contrary the one to the other (i.e.) causing contrary effects in these inferior bodies; For in the heaven, where there is nothing wanting, and where all things are governed with love, there can in no wise be hatred, or enmity.
It being shewed that there is a great power in the affections of the soul, you must know moreover, that there is no less Vertue in words, and the names of things, but greatest of all in speeches, and motions, by which we chiefly differ from bruits, and are called rationall; not from reason, which is taken for that part of the soul, which contains the affections, which Galen saith, is also common to bruits, although in a less degree; but we are called rationall, from that reason which is according to the voice understood in words, and speech, which is called declarative reason, by which part we do chiefly excell all other Animals. For λογος  in Greek signifies, reason, speech, and a word. Now a word is twofold, viz internall, and uttered; An internall word is a conception of the mind, and motion of the soul, which is made without a voice. As in dreams we seem to speak, and dispute with our selves, and whilest we are awake we run over a whole speech silently. But an uttered word hath a certain act in the voice, and properties of locution, and is brought forth with the breath of a man, with opening of his mouth, and with the speech of his tongue, in which nature hath coupled the corporeall voice, and speech to the mind, and understanding, making that a declarer, and interpreter of the conception of our intellect to the hearers, And of this we now speak. Words therefore are the fittest medium betwixt the speaker and the hearer, carrying with them not only the conception of the mind, but also the vertue of the speaker with a certain efficacy unto the hearers, and this oftentimes with so great a power, that oftentimes they change not only the hearers, but also other bodies, and things that have no life. Now those words are of greater efficacy then others, which represent greater things, as intellectuall, Celestiall, and supernaturall, as more expressly, so more misteriously. Also those that come from a more worthy tongue, or from any of a more holy order; for these, as it were certain Signs, and representations, receive a power of Celestiall, and supercelestiall things, as from the vertue of things explained, of which they are the vehicula, so from a power put into them by the vertue of the speaker.
That proper names of things are very necessary in Magicall operations, almost all men testifie: For the naturall power of things proceeds first from the objects to the senses, and then from these to the imagination, and from this to the mind, in which it is first conceived, and then is expressed by voices, and words. The Platonists therefore say, that in this very voice, or word, or name framed, with its Articles, that the power of the thing as it were some kind of life, lies under the form of the signification. First conceived in the mind as it were through certain seeds of things, then by voices or words, as a birth brought forth, and lastly kept in writings. Hence Magicians say, that proper names of things are certain rayes of things, every where present at all times, keeping the power of things, as the essence of the thing signified, rules, and is discerned in them, and know the things by them, as by proper, and living Images. For as the great operator doth produce divers species, and particular things by the influencies of the Heavens, and by the Elements, together with the vertues of Planets; so according to the properties of the influencies proper names result to things, and are put upon them by him who numbers the multitude of the Stars, calling them all by their names, of which names Christ in another place speaks, saying, Your names are written in Heaven. Adam therefore that gave the first names to things, knowing the influencies of the Heavens, and properties of all things, gave them all names according to their natures, as it is written in Genesis, where God brought all things that he had created before Adam, that he should name them, and as he named any thing, so the name of it was, which names indeed contain in them wonderfull powers of the things signified. Every voice therefore that is significative, first of all signifies by the influence of the Celestiall harmony: Secondly, by the imposition of man, although oftentimes otherwise by this, then by that. But when both significations meet in any voice or name, which are put upon them by the said harmony or men, then that name is with a double vertue, viz naturall, and arbitrary, made most efficatious to act, as oft as it shall be uttered in due place, and time, and seriously with an intention exercised upon the matter rightly disposed, and that can naturally be acted upon by it. So we read in Philostratus, that when a maid at Rome dyed  the same day she was married, and was presented to Apollonius, he accurately inquired into her name, which being known, he pronounced some occult thing, by which she revived. It was an observation amongst the Romanes in their holy rites, that when they did besiege any City, they did diligently enquire into the proper, and true name of it, and the name of that God, under whose protection it was, which being known, they did then with some verse call forth the Gods that were the protectors of that City, and did curse the inhabitants of that City, so at length their Gods being absent, did overcome them, as Virgil sings,
Now the verse with which the Gods were called out, and the enemies were curst, when the City was assaulted round about, let him that would know, finde it out in Livy, and Macrobius; but also many of these Serenus Samonicus in his book of secret things makes mention of.
Besides the vertues of words and names, there is also a greater vertue found in sentences, from the truth contained in them, which hath a very great power of impressing, changing, binding, and establishing, so that being used it doth shine the more, and being resisted is more confirmed, and consolidated; which vertue is not in simple words, but in sentences, by which any thing is affirmed, or denyed; of which sort are verses, enchantments, imprecations, deprecations, orations, invocations, obtestations, adjurations, conjurations, and such like. Therefore in composing verses, and orations, for attracting the vertue of any Star, or Deity, you must diligently consider what vertues any Star contains, as also what effects, and operations, and to infer them in verses, by praising, extolling, amplifying, and setting forth those things which such a kind of Star is wont to cause by way of its influence, and by vilifying, and dispraising those things which it is wont to destroy, and hinder, and by supplicating, and begging for that which we desire to get, and by condemning, and detesting that which we would have destroyed, & hindered: and after the same manner to make an elegant oration, and duly distinct by Articles, with competent numbers, and proportions. Moreover Magicians command that we call upon, and pray by the names of the same Star, or name, to them to whom such a verse belongs, by their wonderfull things, or miracles, by their courses, and waies in their sphear, by their light, by the dignity of their Kingdome, by the beauty, and brightness that is in it, by their strong, and powerfull vertues, and by such like as these. As Psyche in Apuleius prayes to Ceres; saying, I beseech thee by thy fruitfull right hand, I intreat thee by the joyfull Ceremonies of harvests, by the quiet silence of thy chests, by the winged Chariots of Dragons thy servants, by the furrows of the Sicilian earth, the devouring Wagon, the clammy earth, by the place of going down into cellars at the light Nuptials of Proserpina, and returns at the light inventions of her daughter, and other things which are concealed in her temple in the City Eleusis in Attica. Besides, with the divers sorts of the names of the Stars, they command us to call upon them by the names of the Intelligencies, ruling over the Stars themselves, of which we shall speak more at large in their proper place. They that desire further examples of these, let them search into the hymns of Orpheus, then which nothing is more efficatious in naturall Magick, if they together with their circumstances, which wise men know, be used according to a due harmony, with all attention. But to return to our purpose. Such like verses being aptly, and duly made according to the rule of the Stars, and being full of signification, & meaning, and opportunely pronounced with vehement affection, as according to the number, proportion of their Articles, so according to the form resulting from the Articles, and by the violence of imagination, do confer a very great power in the inchanter, and sometimes transfers it upon the thing inchanted, to bind, and direct it to the same purpose for which the affections, and speeches of the inchanter  are intended. Now the instrument of inchanters  is a most pure harmoniacall spirit, warm, breathing, living, bringing with it motion, affection, and signification, composed of its parts, endued with sence, and conceived by reason. By the quality therefore of this spirit, and by the Celestiall similitude thereof, besides those things which have already been spoken of, verses also from the opportunity of time, receive from above most excellent vertues, and indeed more sublime, and efficatious then spirits, & vapors exhaling out of the Vegetable life, out of hearbs, roots, gums, aromaticall things, and fumes, and such like. And therefore Magicians inchanting  things, are wont to blow, and breath  upon them the words of the verse, or to breath  in the vertue with the spirit, that so the whole vertue of the soul be directed to the thing inchanted, being disposed for the receiving the said vertue. And here it is to he noted, that every oration, writting, and words, as they induce accustomed motions by their accustomed numbers, and proportions, and form, so also besides their usuall order, being pronounced, or wrote backwards, more unto unusuall effects.
They say that the power of inchantments, and verses is so great, that it is believed they are able to subvert almost all nature, as saith Apuleius, that with a Magicall whispering, swift Rivers are turned back, the slow sea is bound, the Winds are breathed out with one accord, the Sun is stopt, the Moon is clarified, the Stars are pulled out, the day is kept back, the night is prolonged, and of these things sings Lucan,
If these things were not true, there would not be such strict penall Statutes made against them, that should inchant  fruit. And Tibullus saith of a certain Imchantress, Moreover all Poets sing, and Philosophers do not deny, that by verses many wonderfull things may be done, as Corn to be removed, Lightenings to be commanded, diseases to be cured, and such like. For Cato himself in Country affairs used some inchantments  against the diseases of beasts, which as yet are extant in his writings. Also Josephus testifies that Solomon was skilled in those kinds of inchantments. Also Celsus Africanus reports, according to the Egyptian doctrine, that mans body, according to the number of the faces of the Zodiack Signs, was taken care of by so many, viz thirty six spirits, whereof each undertake, and defend their proper part, whose names they call with a peculiar voice, which being called upon, restore to health with their inchantments  the diseased parts of the body.
The use of words, and speech, is to express the inwards of the mind, and from thence to draw forth the secrets of the thoughts, and to declare the will of the speaker. Now writing is the last expression of the mind, and is the number of speech and voice, as also the collection, state, end, continuing, and iteration, making a habit, which is not perfected with the act of ones voice. And whatsoever is in the mind, in voice, in word, in oration, and in speech, the whole, and all of this is in writing also. And as nothing which is conceived in the mind is not expressed by voice, so nothing which is expressed is not also written. And therefore Magicians command, that in every work, there be imprecations, and inscriptions made, by which the operator may express his affection: that if he gather an Hearb, or a Stone, he declare for what use he doth it; if he make a picture, he say, and write to what end he maketh it; with imprecations, and inscriptions. Albertus also in his book called Speculum, doth not disallow, without which all our works would never be brought into effect; Seeing a disposition doth not cause an effect, but the act of the disposition. We find also that the same kind of precepts was in use amongst the Ancients, as Virgil testifies, when he sings,
God gave to man a mind, and speech, which (as saith Mercurius Trismegistus) are thought to be a gift of the same vertue, power, and immortality. The omnipotent God hath by his providence divided the speech of men into divers languages; which languages have according to their diversity received divers, and proper Characters of writing, consisting in their certain order, number, and figure, not so disposed, and formed by hap, or chance, nor by the weak judgement of man, but from above, whereby they agree with the Celestiall, and divine bodies, and vertues. But before all notes of languages, the writing of the Hebrews is of all the most sacred in the figures of Characters, points of vowels, and tops of accents, as consisting in matter, form, and spirit.
The position of the Stars being first made in the seat of God, which is heaven, after the figure of them (as the masters of the Hebrews testifie) are most fully formed the letters of the Celestiall mysteries, as by their figure, form, and signification, so by the numbers signified by them, and also by their various harmony of their conjunction. Whence the more curious Mecubals of the Hebrews do undertake by the figure of their letters, the forms of Characters, and their signature, simpleness, composition, separation, crookedness, directness, defect, abounding, greatness, litleness, crowning, opening, shutting, order, transmutation, joyning together, revolution of letters, and of points, and tops, by the supputation of numbers by the letters of things signified to explain all things, how they proceed from the first cause, and are again to be reduced into the same. Moreover they divide the letters of their Hebrew Alphabet, viz into twelve simple, seven double, and three mothers, which they say signifie as Characters of things, the twelve Signs, seven Planets, and three Elements, viz Fire, Water, and Earth, for they account Aire no Element, but as the glew, and spirit of the Elements. To these also they appoint points, and tops: As therefore by the aspects of Planets, and Signs, together with the Elements, the working spirit, and truth all things have been, and are brought forth, so by these Characters of letters, and points, signifying those things that are brought forth, the names of all things are appointed, as certain Signs, and vehiculas of things explained, carrying with them every where their essence, and vertues. The profound meanings, and Signs are inherent in those Characters, and figures of them, as also numbers, place, order, and revolution; so that Origenes therefore thought that those names being translated into another Idiome, do not retain their proper vertue. For only originall names, which are rightly imposed, because they signify naturally, have a naturall activity: It is not so with them which signifie at pleasure, which have no activity, as they are signifying, but as they are certain naturall things in themselves. Now if there be any originall, whose words have a naturall signification, it is manifest that this is the Hebrew, the order of which he that shall profoundly, and radically observe, and shall know to resolve proportionably the letters thereof, shall have a rule exactly to find out any Idiome. There are therefore two and twenty Letters, which are the foundation of the world, and of creatures that are, and are named in it, and every saying, and every creature are of them, and by their revolutions receive their Name, Being, and Vertue.
The Doctrines of Mathematicks are so necessary to, and have such an affinity with Magick, that they that do profess it without them, are quite out of the way, and labour in vain, and shall in no wise obtain their desired effect. For whatsoever things are, and are done in these inferior naturall vertues, are all done, and governed by number, weight, measure, harmony, motion, and light. And all things which we see in these inferiours, have root, and foundation in them: yet nevertheless without naturall vertues, of Mathematicall Doctrines only works like to naturals can be produced, as Plato saith, a thing not paataking of truth or divinity, but certain Images kin to them, as bodies going, or speaking, which yet want the Animall faculty, such as were those which amongst the Ancients were called Dedalus his Images, and αυτοματα, of which Aristotle makes mention, viz the threefooted Images of Vulcan, and Dedalus, moving themselves, which Homer saith came out of their own accord to exercise, and which we read, moved themselves at the feast of Hiarba the Philosophicall Exerciser: As also that golden Statues performed the offices of Cup bearers, and Carvers to the guests. Also we read of the Statues of Mercury, which did speak, and the wooden Dove of Arthita, which did fly, and the miracles of Boethius, which Cassiodorus made mention of, viz Diomedes in Brass, sounding a Trumpet, and a brazen Snake hissing, and pictures of birds singing most sweetly. Of this kind are those miracles of Images which proceed from Geometry, and Opticks, of which we made some mention in the first book, where we spoke of the Element of Aire, So there are made glasses, some Concave, others of the form of a Columne, making the representations of things in the Aire seem like shadows at a distance: of which sort Apollonius, and Vitellius in their Books De Perspectiva, and Speculis, taught the making, and the use. And we read that Magnus Pompeius brought a certain glass amongst the spoils from the East, to Rome, in which were seen Armies of Armed men. And there are made certain transparent glasses, which being dipped in some certain juices of Hearbs, and irradiated with an artificiall light, fill the whole Aire round about with visions. And I know how to make reciprocall glasses, in which the Sun shining, all things which were illustrated by the raies  thereof are apparently seen many miles off. Hence a Magician, expert in naturall Philosophy, and Mathematicks, and knowing the middle sciences consisting of both these, Arithmatick, Musick, Geometry, Opticks, Astronomie, and such sciences that are of weights, measures, propertions, articles, and joynts, knowing also Mechanicall Arts resulting from these, may without any wonder, if he excell other men in Art, and wit, do many wonderfull things, which the most prudent, and wise men may much admire. Are there not some reliques extant of the Ancients works, viz Hercules, and Alexanders pillars, the gate of Caspia made of brass, and shut with Iron beams, that it could by no Wit or Art, be broken? And the Pyramis of Julius Caesar erected at Rome neer the hill Vaticanus, and Mountains built by Art in the middle of the Sea, and Towers, and heaps of Stones, such as I saw in England put together by an incredible Art. And we read in faithfull Historians, that in former times Rocks have been cut off, and Vallies  made, and Mountains made into a Plain, Rocks have been digged through, Promontories have been opened in the Sea, the bowels of the Earth made hollow, Rivers divided, Seas joyned to Seas, the Seas restrained, the bottome of the Sea been searched, Pools exhausted, Fens dryed up, new Islands made, and again restored to the continent, all which, although they my seem to be against nature, yet we read have been done, and we see some reliques of them remaining till this day, which the vulgar say were the works of the divell, seeing the Arts, and Artificers thereof have been dead out of all memory, neither are there any that care to understand, or search into them. Therefore they seeing any wonderfull sight, do impute it to the divell, as his work, or think it is a miracle, which indeed is a work of naturall, or Mathematicall Philosophy. As if anyone should be ignorant of the vertue of the Loadstone, and should see heavy Iron drawn upwards, or hanged in the Aire (as we read the Iron Image of Mercury did long since at Treveris hang up in the middle of the Temple by Loadstones, this verse attesting the same.
The like to which we read was done concerning the image of the Sun at Rome, in the Temple of Serapis) would not such an ignorant man, I say, presently say it is the work of the divell? But if he shall know the vertue of the Loadstone to the Iron, and shall make triall of it, he presently ceaseth to wonder, and doth no more scruple it to be the work of nature. But here it is convenient that you know, that as by naturall vertues we collect naturall vertues, so by abstracted, mathematicall, and celestiall, we receive celestiall vertues, as motion, life, sense, speech, southsaying, and divination, even in matter less disposed, as that which is not made by nature, but only by art. And so images that speak, and foretell things to come, are said to be made, as William of Paris relates of a brazen head made under the rising of Saturn, which they say spake with a mans voice. But he that will choose a disposed matter, and most fit to receive, and a most powerfull agent, shall undoubtedly produce more powerfull effects. For it is a generall opinion of the Pythagoreans, that as Mathematicall things are more formall then Naturall, so also they are more efficacious: as they have less dependence in their being, so also in their operation. But amongst all Mathematicall things, numbers, as they have more of form in them, so also are more efficacious, to which not only Heathen Philosophers, but also Hebrew, and Christian Divines do attribute vertue, and efficacy, as well to effect what is good, as what is bad.
Severinus Boethius saith, that all things which were first made by the nature of things in its first Age, seem to be formed by the proportion of numbers, for this was the principall pattern in the mind of the Creator. Hence is borrowed the number of the Elements, hence the courses of times, hence the motion of the Stars, and the revolution of the heaven, and the state of all things subsist by the uniting together of numbers. Numbers therefore are endowed with great and sublime vertues. For it is no wonder, seeing there are so many, and so great occult vertues in naturall things, although of manifest openations, that there should be in numbers much greater, and more occult, and also more wonderfull, and efficacious, for as much as they are more formall, more perfect, and naturally in the celestialls, not mixt with separated substances; and lastly, having the greatest, and most simple commixtion with the Ideas in the mind of God, from which they receive their proper, and most efficacious vertues: wherefore also they are of more force, and conduce most to the obtaining of spirituall, and divine gifts, as in naturall things, elementary qualities are powerfull in the transmuting of any elementary thing. Again, all things that are, and are made, subsist by, and receive their vertue from numbers. For time consists of number, and all motion, and action, and all things which are subject to time, and motion.
Harmony also, and voices have their power by, and consist of numbers, and their proportions, and the proportions arising from numbers, do by lines, and points make Characters, and figures: And these are proper to Magicall operations, the middle which is betwixt both being appropriated by declining to the extreams, as in the use of letters. And lastly, all species of naturall things, and of those things which are above nature, are joyned together by certain numbers: which Pythagoras seeing, saith, that number is that by which all things consist, and distributes each vertue to each number. And Proclus saith, Number hath alwaies a being: Yet there is one in voyce, another in the proportion of them, another in the soul, and reason, and another in divine things. But Themistius, and Boethius, and Averrois the Babilonian, together with Plato, do so extoll numbers, that they think no man can be a true Philosopher without them. Now they speak of a rationall, and formall number, not of a materiall, sensible, or vocall, the number of Merchants buying, and selling, of which the Pythagoreans, and Platonists, and our Austin  make no reckoning, but apply it to the proportion resulting from it, which number they call naturall, rationall, and formall, from which great mysteries flow, as well in naturall, as divine, and heavenly things. By it is there a way made for the searching out, and understanding of all things knowable. By it the next access to naturall prophesying is had: and the Abbot Joachim proceeded no other way in his Prophecies, but by formall numbers.
That there lyes  wonderfull efficacy, and vertue in numbers, as well to good as to bad, not only most eminent Philosophers do unanimously teach, but also Catholike  Doctors, and especially Hierom, Austin, Origen, Ambrose, Gregory of Nazianzen, Athanasius, Basilius, Hilarius, Rubanus, Bede, and many more confirm. Hence Hilarius in his Commentaries upon the Psalms, testifies that the seventy Elders, according to the efficacy of numbers, brought the Psalms into order. Rabanus also, a famous Doctor, composed an excellent book of the vertues of numbers: But now how great vertues numbers have in nature, is manifest in the hearb  which is called Cinquefoil, i.e. five leaved Grass; for this resists poysons  by vertue of the number of five; also drives away divells, conduceth to expiation; and one leafe of it taken twice in a day in wine, cures the Feaver  of one day: three the tertian Feaver: foure the quartane. In like manner four grains of the seed of Turnisole being drunk, cures the quartane, but three the tertian. In like manner Vervin is said to cure Feavers, being drunk in wine, if in tertians it be cut from the third joynt, in quartans from the fourth. A Serpent, if he be once struck with a Spear, dieth, if twice, recovers strength. These and many such as these are read, and testified in divers Authors. We must know now whence these are done, which certainly have a cause, which is a various proportion of various numbers amongst themselves. There is also a wonderfull experiment of the number of seven, that every seventh male, born without a female coming betwixt, hath power to cure the Kings evill by his touch alone, or word. Also every seventh daughter that is born, is said wonderfully to help forward the birth of children: neither is the naturall number here considered, but the formall consideration that is in the number. And let that which we spake before, be alwaies kept in mind, viz that these powers are not in vocall, or numbers of merchants buying, and selling, but in rationall, formall, and naturall; These are distinct mysteries of God, and nature. But he that knows how to joyn  together the vocall numbers, and naturall with divine, and order them into the same harmony, shall be able to work and know wonderfull things by numbers; the Pythagorians profess that they can prognosticate many things by the numbers of names, in which truly, unless there did ly  a great mysterie, John had not said in the Revelation, He which hath understanding, let him compute the number of the name of the beast, which is the number of a man, and this is the most famous manner of computing amongst the Hebrews, and Cabalists, as we shall shew afterwards. But this you must know, that simple numbers signifie Divine things: numbers of ten; Celestiall numbers of an hundred; terrestriall numbers of a thousand; those things that shall be in a future age. Besides, seeing the parts of the mind are according to an Arithmeticall Mediocrity, by reason of the identity, or equality of excess, coupled together. But the body, whose parts differ in their greatness, is according to a Geometricall mediocrity, compounded: But an animall consists of both, viz soul and body, according to that mediocrity, which is sutable  to harmony: Hence it is that numbers do work very much upon the soul, figures upon the body, and harmony upon the whole animall.
Now let us treat particularly of numbers themselves: and because number is nothing els  but a repetition of Unity, let us first consider Unity it self. For Unity doth most simply go through every number, and is the common measure, fountain, and originall of all numbers, contains every number joyned  together in it self intirely, the beginner of every multitude, alwayes the same, and unchangable: whence also being multiplyed into it self, produceth nothing but it self: it is indivisible, void of all parts: But if it seem at any time to be divided, it is not cut, but indeed Multiplied into Unities: yet none of these Unities is greater or lesser then the whole Unity, as a part is less than the whole: It is not therefore Multiplyed into parts, but into it self: Therefore some called it concord, some piety, and some friendship, which is so knit, that it cannot be cut into parts. But Martianus, according to the opinion of Aristotle saith, it is named Cupid, because it is made one alone, and will alwaies bewail it self, and beyond it self it hath nothing, but being void of all haughtiness, or coupling, turns its proper heats into it self. It is therefore the one beginning, and end of all things, neither hath it any beginning, or end it self: Nothing is before one, nothing is after one, and beyond it is nothing, and all things which are, desire that one, because all things proceeded from one, and that all things may be the same, it is necessary that they partake of that one: And as all things proceeded of one into many things, so all things endeavour to return to that one, from which they proceeded; it is necessary that they should put off multitude. One therefore is referred to the high God, who seeing he is one, and innumerable, yet creates innumerable things of himself, and contains them within himself. There is therefore one God, one world of the one God, one Sun of the one world, also one Phoenix in the World, one King  amongst Bees, one Leader amongst Flocks of Catel, one Ruler amongst heards  of Beasts, & Cranes follow one, and many other Animalls honour Unity; Amongst the Members of the body there is one Principal by which all the rest are guided, whether it be the head, or (as some will) the heart. There is one Element overcoming, and penetrating all things, viz Fire. There is one thing created of God, the subject of all wondring, which is on Earth, or in Heaven, it is actually Animal, Vegetable, and Minerall, every where found, known by few, called by none by its proper name, but covered with figures, and Riddles, without which neither Alchymie, nor Naturall Magick, can attain to their compleat end, or perfection. From one man, Adam, all men proceed, from that one all become mortall, from that one Jesus Christ they are regenerated: and as saith Paul, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of all, one mediator betwixt God and man, one most high Creator, who is over all, by all, and in us all. For there is one Father, God, from whence all, and we in him: one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all, and we by him: one God Holy Ghost, into whom all, and we into him.
The first Number is of two, because it is the first Multitude, it can be measured by no number besides unity alone, the common measure of all Numbers: It is not compounded of Numbers, but of one unity only; neither is it called a number uncompounded, but more properly not compounded: The Number of three is called the first Number uncompounded: But the Number of two is the first branch of unity, and the first procreation: Hence it is called generation, and Juno, and an imaginable Corporation, the proof of the first motion, the first form of parity: the number of the first equality, extremity, and distance betwixt, and therefore of peculiar equity, and the proper act thereof, because it consists of two equally poysed: and it is called the Number of Science, and Memory, and of light, and the number of man, who is called another, and the lesser World: it is also called the number of charity, and mutuall love, of marriage, and society, as it is said by the Lord, Two shall be one flesh. And Solomon saith: It is better that two be together then one, for they have a benefit by their mutuall society: If one shall fall, he shall be supported by the other. Wo  to him that is alone, because when he falls he hath not another to help him: and if two sleep together, they shall warm one the other; how shall one be hot alone? And if any prevaile against him, two resist him. And it is called the number of Wedlock and Sex; for there are two sexes, Masculine, and Feminine: and two Dovess bring forth two Eggs, out of the first of which is hatched the Male, out of the second the Female. It is also called the midle, that is capable, that is good, and bad, partaking, and the beginning of division, of Multitude, and distinction, and signifies matter. This is also sometimes the number of discord, and confusion, of misfortune, and uncleanness, whence Saint Hierom against Jovianus saith, that therefore it was not spoken in the second day of the creation of the world, and God said, That it was good, because the number of two is evill. Hence also it was, that God commanded that all unclean Animals should go into the Ark by couples: because as I said, the number of two, is a number of uncleanness, and it is most unhappy in their Soothsayings, especially if those things, from whence the Soothsaying is taken, be Saturnall, or Martiall, for these two are accounted by the Astrologers unfortunate. It is also reported, that the number of two doth cause apparitions of Ghosts, and fearfull Goblins, and bring mischiefs of evill spirits to them that travell by night. Pythagoras (as Eusebius reports) said, that Unity was God, and a good intellect; and that Duality was a Divell, and an evill intellect, in which is a materiall multitude: wherefore the Pythagoreans say, that two is not a number, but a certain confusion of unities. And Plutarke  writes, that the Pythagorians  called unity Apollo, and two, strife, and boldness; and three, Justice, which is the highest perfection, and is not without many mysteries. Hence there were two Tables of the Law in Sina, two Cherubins looking to the Propitiatory in Moses, two Olives dropping oyle, in Zachariah, two natures in Christ, Divine, and Humane; Hence Moses saw two appearances of God, viz his face, and back-parts, also two Testaments, two commands of Love, two first dignities, two first people, two kinds of Spirits, good and bad, two intellectuall creatures, an Angell, and soul, two great lights, two Solstitia, two equinoctials, two poles, two Elements, producing a living soul, viz Earth, and Water.
The number of three is an incompounded number, a holy number, a number of perfection, a most powerfull number. For there are three persons in God, there are three Theologicall vertues in Religion. Hence it is that this number conduceth to the Ceremonies of God, and Religion, that by the solemnity of which, prayers, and sacrifices are thrice repeated. Whence Virgil sings,
And in Pliny it was the cusome in every medicine to spit with three deprecations, and hence to be cured. The number of thee is perfected with three Augmentations, long, broad, and deep, beyond which there is no progression of dimension, whence the first number is called square. Hence it is said that to a body that hath three measures, and to a square number, nothing can be added. Wherefore Aristotle in the beginning of his speeches concerning Heaven, cals it as it were a Law, according to which all things are disposed. For Corporeall, and spirituall things consist of three things, viz beginning, middle, and end. By three (as Tresmegistus  saith) the world is perfected: Hemarmene {so the L}, necessity, and order (i.e.) concurrence of causes, which many call fate, and the execution of them to the fruit, or increase, and a due distribution of the increase. The whole measure of time is concluded in three, viz Past, present, to come; All magnitude is contained in three; line, superficies, and body, every body consists of three Intervals, length, bredth, thickness. Harmony contains three consents in time, Diapason, Hemiolion, Diatessaron. There are three kinds of souls, Vegetative, sensitive, and intellectuall. And as saith the Prophet, God orders the world by number, weight, and measure, and the number of three is deputed to the Ideall forms thereof, as the number two is to the procreating matter, and unity to God the maker of it. Magicians do constitute three Princes of the world, Oromasis, Mitris, Araminis  (i.e.) God, the Mind, and the Spirit. By the three square or solid, the three numbers of nine of things produced are distributed, viz of the supercelestiall into nine orders of Intelligencies: of Celestiall into nine Orbs: of inferiours into nine kinds of generable, and corruptible things. Lastly in this ternall Orb, viz twenty seven, all Musical proportions are included, as Plato, and Proclus, do at large discourse. And the number of three hath in a harmony of five, the grace of the first voyce. Also in Intelligencies there are three Hierarchies of Angelicall spirits. There are three powers of Intellectuall creatures, memory, mind, and will. There are three orders of the blessed, viz of Martyrs, Confessors, and Innocents. There are three quaternions of Celestiall Signs, viz Of fixt, moveable, and common, as also of houses, viz centers, succeeding, and falling. There are also three faces, and heads in every Sign, and three Lords of each triplicity. There are three fortunes amongst the Planets. Three graces amongst the Goddesses. Three Ladies of destiny amongst the infernall crew. Three Judges. Three furies. Three-headed Cerberus. We read also of a thrice double Hecate. Three moneths  of the virgin Diana. Three persons in the supersubstantiall Divinity. Three times, of Nature, Law, and Grace. Three Theologicall vertues, Faith, Hope, and Charity. Jonas was three days in the Whales belly; and so many was Christ in the grave.
The Pythagorians call the Number of four Tetractis, and prefer it before all the vertues of Numbers, because it is the foundation, and root of all other numbers; whence also all foundations, as well in artificiall things, as naturall, and divine, are four square, as we shall shew afterwards: and it signifies solidity, which also is demonstrated by a four square figure. For the number four is the first four square plain, which consists of two proportions, whereof the first is of one to two, the latter of two to four, and it proceeds by a double procession and proportion, viz of one to one, and of two to two, beginning at a unity, and ending at a quaternity: which proportions differ in this, that according to Arithmatick, they are unequall to one the other: but according to Geometry are equall. Therefore a four square is ascribed to God the Father, and also contains the mysterie  of the whole Trinity: for by its single proportion, viz by the first of one to one, the unity of the paternall substance is signified, from which proceeds one Son, equall to him; by the next procession, also simple, viz of two to two, is signified by the second procession the Holy Ghost from both, that the Son be equall to the Father by the first procession; and the Holy Ghost be equall to both by the second procession. Hence that superexcellent, and great name of the divine Trinity of God is written with four letters, viz Yod, He, and Vau; He, where it is the aspiration He, signifies the proceeding of the spirit from both: for He being duplicated, terminates both syllables, and the whole name, but is pronounced Jova, as some will, whence that Jovis of the heathen, which the Ancients did picture with four ears, whence the number four is the fountain, and head of the whole divinity. And the Pythagorians  call it the perpetuall fountain of nature: for there are four degrees in the Scale of nature, viz to be, to live, to be sensible, to understand. There are four motions in nature, viz ascendent, descendent, going forward, circular. There are four Corners in the heaven, viz rising, falling, the midle  of the heaven, and the bottome of it. There are four Elements under Heaven, viz Fire, Aire, Water, and Earth; according to these there are four triplicities in Heaven: There are four first qualities under the Heaven, viz Cold, Heat, Driness, and Moystness, from these are the four Humours, Blood, Flegm, Choller, Melancholy. Also the year is divided into four parts, which are Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter; also the wind is divided into Eastern, Western, Northern, and Southern. There are also four rivers of Paradise, and so many infernall. Also the number four makes up all knowledge: first it fills up every simple progress of numbers with four termes, viz with one, two, three, and four, constituting the number ten. It fills up every difference of numbers, the first even, and conteining the first odd in it. It hath in Musick Diatessaron, the grace of the fourth voice. Also it conteins the instrument of four strings, and a Pythagorean Diagram, whereby are found out first of all musicall tunes, and all harmony of Musick. For Double, Treble, fourtimes double, one and halfe, one and a third part, a concord of all, a double concord of all, of five, of four, and all consonancy is limited within the bounds of the number four. It doth also contein the whole of Mathematicks in four terms, viz point, line, superficies, and profundity. It comprehends all nature in four terms, viz substance, quality, quantity, and motion. Also all naturall Phylosophy, in which are the seminary vertues of nature, the naturall springing, the growing form, and the compositum. Also Metaphysick is comprehended in four bounds, viz being, essence, vertue, and action. Morall Phylosophy is comprehended with four vertues, viz prudence, justice, fortitude, temperence. It hath also the power of justice: hence a fourfold law: of providence from God; fatall, from the soul of the world: of nature from Heaven: of prudence, from man. There are also four judiciary powers in all things being, viz the intellect, discipline, opinion, and sense. It hath also great power in all mysteries. Hence the Pythagoreans did ratifie  the number four with an oath, as if it were the cheifest  ground whereon their faith was grounded, and their belief might be confirmed. Hence it was called the Pythagorians oath, which is expressed in these verses.
Also there are four rivers of Paradise; four Gospels received from four Evangalists throughout the whole Church. The Hebrews received the cheifest  name of God written with four letters. Also the Egyptians, Arabians, Persians, Magicians, Mahumitans, Grecians, Tuscans, Latines, write the name of God with only four letters, viz thus, Theut, Alla, Sire, Orsi, Abdi, θεος, Esar, Deus. Hence the Lacedemonians were wont to paint Jupiter with four wings. Hence also in Orpheus his divinity, it is said that Neptunes Chariots are drawn with four horses. There are also four kinds of divine furies, proceeding from severall deities, viz from the Muses, Dionysius, Apollo, and Venus. Also the Prophet Ezekiel saw four beasts by the river Chobar, and four Cherubims in four wheels. Also in Daniel, four great beasts did ascend from the Sea, and four winds did fight. And in the Revelations four beasts were full of eyes, before, and behind: standing round about the Throne of God, and four Angels, to whom was given power to hurt the Earth, and the Sea, did stand upon the four corners of the Earth, holding the four winds, that they should not blow upon the Earth, nor upon the Sea, nor upon any Tree.
The number five is of no small force, for it consists of the first even, and the first odd, as of a Female, and Male; For an odd number is the Male, and the even the Female. Whence Arithmeticians call that the Father, and this the Mother. Therefore the number five is of no small perfection, or vertue, which proceeds from the mixtion of these numbers: It is also the just midle  of the universal number, viz ten. For if you divide the number ten, there will be nine and one, or eight and two, or seven and three, or six and four, and every collection makes the number ten, and the exact midle  alwaies is the number five, and its equidistant; and therefore it is called by the Pythagoreans the number of Wedlock, as also of justice, because it divides the number ten in an even Scale. There be five senses in man, sight, hearing, smelling, tasting, and feeling: five powers in the soul, Vegetative, Sensitive, Concupiscible, Irascible, Rationall: five fingers on the hand: five wandering Planets in the heavens, according to which there are five-fold terms in every sign. In Elements there are five kinds of mixt  bodies, viz Stones, Metals, Plants, Plant-Animals, Animals, and so many kinds of Animals, as men, four-footed beasts, creeping, swimming, flying. And there are five kinds by which all things are rnade of God, viz Essence, the same, another, sense, motion. The Swallow brings forth but five young, which she feeds with equity, beginning with the eldest, and so the rest, according to their age. Also this number hath great power in expiations: For in holy things it drives away Divels. In naturall things, it expels poysons. It is also called the number of fortunateness, and favour, and it is the Seale of the Holy Ghost, and a bond that binds all things, and the number of the cross, yea eminent with the principall wounds of Christ, whereof he vouchsafed to keep the scars in his glorifyed body. The heathen Philosophers did dedicate it as sacred to Mercury, esteeming the vertue of it to be so much more excellent then the number four, by how much a living thing is more excellent then a thing without life. For in this number the Father Noah found favour with God, and was preserved in the floud  of waters. In the vertue of this number Abraham, being an hundred years old, begat a Son of Sarah, being ninety years old, and a barren Woman, and past child bearing, and grew up to be a great people. Hence in time of grace the name of divine omnipotency is called upon with five letters. For in time of nature the name of God was called upon with three letters. שדי Sadai: in time of the Law, the ineffable name of God was expressed with four letters יהוה insteed of which the Hebrews express אדני Adonai: in time of grace the ineffable name of God was with five letters יהשוה Ihesu, which is called upon with no less mysterie then that of three letters ישו.
Six is the number of perfection, because it is the most perfect in nature, in the whole course of numbers, from one to ten, and it alone is so perfect, that in the collection of its parts it results the same, neither wanting, nor abounding. For if the parts thereof, viz the midle, the third, and sixt  part, which are three, two, one, be gathered together, they perfectly fill up the whole body of six, which perfection all the other numbers want: Hence by the Pythagorians it is said to be altogether applyed to generation, and Marriage, and is called the Scale of the world. For the world is made of the number six, neither doth it abound, or is defective. Hence that is, because the world was finished by God the sixt day. For the sixt day God saw all the things which he had made, and they were very good. Therefore the heaven, and the earth, and all the Host thereof were finished. It is also called the number of man, because the sixt day man was created: and it is also the number of our redemption, for the sixt day Christ suffered for our redemption: whence there is a great affinity betwixt the number six and the Cross, labour, and servitude: hence it is commanded in the Law, that in six days the work is to be done, six days Manna is to be gathered, six years the ground was to be sown, and that the Hebrew servant should serve his Master six years; six days the glory of the Lord appeared upon Mount Sina, covering it with a cloud: the Cherubins had six wings,  circles in the Firmament, Artick, Antartick, two Tropicks, Equinoctiall, & Eclipticall, six wandring  Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, running through the latitude of the Zodiack, on both sides the Eclyptick. There are six substantificall qualities in the Elements, viz Sharpness, Thinness, Motion, and the contrary to these, Dulness, Thickness, Rest. There are six differences of position, Upwards, Downwards, Before, Behind, on the right side, one the left side. There are six naturall offices, without which nothing can be, viz Magnitude, Colour, Figure, Intervall, Standing, Motion. Also a solid Figure of any four square thing hath six superficies. There are six Tones of all harmony, viz Tones, &'. half tones, which make one tone, which is the sixt.
The number seaven  is of various, and manifold power, for it consists of one, and six, or of two, and five, or of three and four, and it hath a Unity, as it were the coupling together of two threes: whence if we consider the severall parts thereof, and the joyning together of them, without doubt we shall confess that it is as well by the joyning together of the parts thereof, as by its fullness apart, most full of all Majesty. And the Pythagorians call it the Vehiculum of mans life, which it doth not receive from its parts so, as it perfects by its proper right of its whole, for it contains body, and soul, for the body consists of four Elements, and is endowed with four qualities: Also the number three respects the soul, by reason of its threefold power, viz rationall, irascible, and concupiscible. The number seaven therefore, because it consists of three, and four, joyns the soul to the body, and the vertue of this number relates to the generation of men, and it causeth man to be received, formed, brought forth, nourished, live, and indeed altogether to subsist. For when the genitall seed is received in the womb of the woman, if it remain there seaven hours after the effusion of it, it is certain that it will abide there for good: Then the first seaven daye it is coagulated, and is fit to receive the shape of a man: then it produceth mature infants, which are called infants of the seaventh moneth, i.e. because they are born the seaventh moneth. After the birth, the seaventh hour tryes whether it will live or no: for that which shall bear the breath of the aire after that hour is conceived will live. After seaven dayes it casts off the reliques of the Navell.
After twice seaven dayes its sight begins to move after the light: in the third seaventh it turns its eyes, and whole face freely. After seaven moneths it breeds teeth: After the second seaventh moneth it sits without fear of falling: After the third seaventh moneth it begins to speak: After the fourth seaventh moneth it stands strongly, and walks: after the fifth seaventh moneth it begins to refrain sucking its Nurse: After seaven years its first teeth fall, and new are bred, fitter for harder meat, and its speech is perfected: After the second seaventh year boys wax ripe, and then is a beginning of generation: At the third seaventh year they grow to be men in stature, and begin to be hairy, and become able, and strong for generation: At the fourth seaventh year they begin to barnish, and cease to grow taller: In the fifth seaventh year they attain to the perfection of their strength: The sixt seaven year they keep their strength; The seaventh seaventh year they attain to their utmost discretion, and wisdome, and the perfect age of men. But when they come to the tenth seaventh year, where the number seaven is taken for a compleat number, then they come to the common tearm of life, the Prophet saying, Our age is seaventy years. The utmost hight  of mans body is seaven feet. There are also seaven degrees in the body, which compleat the dimension of its altitude from the bottome to the top, viz marrow, bone, nerve, vein, artery, flesh, skin. There are seaven, which by the Greeks are called black members, the Tongue, the Heart, the Lunges, the Liver, the Spleen, and two Kidnies. There are also seaven principal parts of the body, the head, the breast, the hands, the feet, and the privy members. It is manifest concerning breath, and meat, that without drawing of the breath the life doth not endure above seaven hours: and they that are starved with famine, live not above seaven dayes. The Veins also, and arteries (as Physicians say) are moved by the seaventh number. Also judgements in diseases are made with greater manifestation upon the seaventh dayes, which Physitians  call criticall, i.e. judiciall. Also of seaven portions God Creates the soul, as divine Plato witnesseth in Timeus. The soul also receives the body by seaven degrees. All difference of voices proceeds to the seaventh degree, after which there is the same revolution. Again, there are seaven modulations of the voyces, Ditonus, Semiditonus, Diutessaron, Diapente with a tone, Diapente with a half time, and diapason. There is also in Celestials a most potent power of the number seven. For seeing there are four corners of the Heaven Diametrically looking one towards the other, which indeed is accounted a most full, and powerfull aspect, and consists of the number seven. For it is made from the seventh Sign, and makes a Cross, the most powerfull figure of all, of which we shall speak in its due place. But this you must not be ignorant of, that the number seven hath a great Communion with the Cross. By the same radiation, and number the solstice is distant from Winter, and the Winter equinoctium from the Summer, all which are done by seven Signs. There are also seven Circles in the Heaven, according to the longitudes of the Axel-tree. There are seven Stars about the Articke  Pole, greater, and lesser, called Charls-Wain, also seven Stars called the Pleiades, and seven Planets, according to those seven dayes, constituting a week. The Moon is the seventh of the Planets & next to us observing this number more then the rest, this number dispensing the mofion, and light thereof. For in twenty eight dayes it runs round the Compass of the whole Zodiack, which number of dayes, the number seven, with its seven tearms, viz from one to seven, doth make, and fill up, as much as the several numbers, by adding to the Antecedents, and makes four times seven dayes, in which the Moon runs through, and about all the longitude, and latitude of the Zodiack by measuring, and measuring again: with the like seven of dayes it dispenseth its light, by changing it; For the first seven dayes unto the middle as it were of the divided world, it increaseth; the second seven dayes it fils  its whole Orb with light; the third by decreasing is again contracted into a divided Orb; but after the fourth seven dayes, it is renewed with the last diminuafion of its light, and by the same seven of dayes it disposeth the increase, and decrease of the Sea, for in the first seven of the increase of the Moon, it is by little lessened; in the second by degrees increased: but the third is like the first, and the fourth doth the sure as the second. It is also applyed to Saturn, which ascending from the lower, is the seventh Planet, which betokens rest, to which the seventh day is ascribed, which signifies the seven thousandth, wherein (as John witnesseth) the Dragon, which is the Divell, and Satan, being bound, men shall be quiet, and lead a peaceable life. Moreover the Phythagorians  call seven the number of Virginity, because the first is that which is neither generated, or generates, neither can it be divided into two equall parts, so as to be generated of another number repeated, or being doubled to bring forth any other number of it self, which is contained within the bounds of the number ten, which is manifestly the first bound of numbers, and therefore they dedicate the number seven to Pallas. It hath also in Religion most potent signs of its esteem, and it is called the number of an oath. Hence amongst the Hebrews to swear is called Septenare (i.e.) to protest by seven. So Abraham, when he made a covenant with Abimelech, appointed seven Ewe Lambs for a testimony. It is also called the number of blessedness, or of rest, whence that,
viz in soul, and body. The seventh day the Creator rested from his work, wherefore this day was by Moses called the Sabbath (i.e.) the day of rest; hence it was that Christ rested the seventh day in the grave. Also this number hath a great communion with the Cross, as is above shewed, as also with Christ. For in Christ is all our blessedness, rest, and felicity; besides, it is most convenient in purifications. whence Apuleius saith, and I put myself forthwith into the bath of the Sea, to be purified, and put my head seven times under the Waves. And the Leprous person that was to be cleansed, was sprinkled seven times with the blood of a Sparrow; and Elisha the Prophet, as it is written in the Second Book of the Kings, saith unto the Leprous person; Go, and wash thy self seven times in Jordan, and thy flesh shall be made whole, and thou shalt be cleansed, and it follows a little after, And he washed himself seven times in Jordan, according to the Prophets saying, and he was cleansed. Also it is a number of repentance, and remission: Hence was ordeined the seaventh years repentance for every sin, according to the opinion of the wise man, saying, And upon every sinner seaven fold: Also the seaventh year there were granted remissions, and after full seaven years there was giving a full remission, as is read in Leviticus. And Christ with seaven petitions finished his speech of our satisfaction: hence also it is called the number of liberty, because the seaventh year the Hebrew servant did challenge liberty for himself. It is also most sutable to divine praises. Whence the Prophet saith, Seaven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgements. It is moreover called the number of revenge, as saith the Scripture, and Cain shall be revenged seaven fold. And the Psalmist saith, Render unto our Neighbours seaven fold into their bosome, their reproach. Hence there are seaven wickednesses, as saith Solomon, and seaven wickeder spirits taken, are read of in the Gospel. It signifies also the time of the present circle, because it is finished in the space of seaven days. Also it is consecrated to the Holy Ghost, which the Prophet Isaiah describes to be seaven fold, according to his gifts, viz the spirit of wisdom, and understanding, the spirit of counsell, and strength, the spirit of knowledge, and holiness, and the spirit of the fear of the Lord, which we read in Zachariah to be the seaven eyes of God. There are also seaven Angells, spirits standing in the presence of God, as is read in Tobias, and in the Revelation; seaven Kamps did burn before the Throne of God, and seaven golden Candlesticks, and in the midle thereof was one like to the son of man, and he had in his right hand seaven Stars. Also there were seaven spirits before the Throne of God, and seaven Angells stood before the Throne, and there were given to them seaven Trumpets. And he saw a Lamb having seaven horns, and seaven eyes, and he saw the book sealed with seaven Seales, and when the seaventh seal was opened, there was made silence in heaven. Now by all what hath been said, it is apparent that the number seaven, amongst the other numbers, may deservedly be said to be most full of all efficacy. Moreover, the number seaven hath great conformity with the number twelve; For as three, and four make seaven, so thrice four make twelve, which are the numbers of the celestiall Planets, and signs, resulting from the same root, and by the number four of the nature of inferiour things. There is in sacred writ a very great observance of this number, before all others, and many, and very great are the mysteries thereof; many we have decreed to reckon up here, repeating them out of holy writ, by which it will easily appear, that the number seaven doth signifie a certain fulness of sacred mysteries. For we read in Genesis, that the seaventh was the day of the rest of the Lord; & Enoch, a pious, holy man, was the seaventh from Adam, and that there was another seaventh man from Adam, a wicked man, by name Lamech, that had two wives; and that the sin of Cain should be abolished the seaventh generation: As it is written, Cain shall be punished seaven fold: and he that shall slay Cain, shall be revenged seaven fold, to which the Master of the History collects, that there were seaven sins of Cain. Also of all clean beasts seaven, and seaven were brought into the Ark, as also of Fowles: And after seaven days the Lord rained upon the Earth, and upon the seaventh day the fountains of the deep were broken up, and the waters covered the Earth. Also Abraham gave to Abimelech seaven Ewe Lambs: and Jacob served seaven years for Leah, and seaven more for Rachael: and seaven dayes the people of Israel bewailed the death of Jacob. Moreover, we read in the same place, of seaven Kine, and seaven Ears of Corn, seaven years of plenty, and seaven years of scarcity. And in Exodus, the Sabboth of Sabboths, the holy rest to the Lord, is commanded to be on the seaventh day. Also on the seaventh day Moses ceased to pray. On the seaventh day there shall be a solemnity of the Lord, the seaventh year the servant shall go out free: seaven dayes let the Calf, and the Lamb be with its damm; the seaventh year let the ground that hath been sown six years, be at rest: the seaventh day shall be a holy Sabboth, and a rest: the seaventh day, because it is the Sabboth, shall be called holy. In Leviticus the seaventh day also shall be more observed, and be more holy: and the first day of the seaventh moneth shall be a Sabboth of memoriall. Seaven dayes shall the sacrifices be offered to the Lord, seaven dayes shall the holy dayes of the Lord be celebrated, seaven dayes in a year everlastingly in the generations. In the seaventh moneth you shall celebrate feasts, and shall dwell in Tabernacles seaven dayes: seaven times he shall sprinkle himself before the Lord, that hath dipped his finger in blood: he that is cleansed from the Leprosy, shall dip seaven times in the blood of a sparrow: seaven days shall she be washed with running water, that is menstruous: seaven times he shall dip his finger in the blood of a bullock: seaven times I will smite you for your sins: In Deuteronomy seaven people possessed the Land of promise. There is also read of a seaventh year of remission, and seaven Candles set up on the South side of the Candlesticks. And in Numbers it is read, that the sons of Israel offered up seaven Ewe Lambs without spot, and that seaven dayes they did eat unleavened bread, and that sin was expiated with seaven Lambs, & a Goat, and that the seaventh day was celebrated, and holy, and the first day of the seaventh moneth was observed, and kept holy, and the seaventh moneth of the feast of Tabernacles, & sseven Calves were offered on the seaventh day, and Baalam erected seaven Altars; seaven dayes Mary the sister of Aaron went forth leprous out of the Camp, seaven dayes he that touched a dead carkass  was unclean. And in Joshua seaven priests carried the Ark of the Covenant before the Host, and seaven dayes they went round the Cities, and seaven trumpets were carried by the seaven Priests, and on the seaventh day the seaven Priests sounded the Trumpets. And in the book of Judges, Abessa raigned  in Israel seaven years, Sampson kept his nuptialls seaven dayes, and the seaventh day he put forth a Riddle to his wife, he was bound with seaven green  withs, seaven locks of his head were shaved off, seaven years were the children of Israel oppressed by the King of Maden  And in the books of the Kings, Elias prayed seaven times, and at the seaventh time, behold a little cloud! seaven dayes the children of Israel pitched over against the Syrians, and in the seaventh day the battell  was joyned: seaven years famine was threatened to David for the peoples murmuring; and seaven times the child sneesed, that was raised  by Elisha,  and seaven men were crucified together in the dayes of the first harvest. Naaman was made clean with seaven washings by Elisha, the seaventh moneth Golias was slain. And in Hester we read, that the King of Persia had three Eunuchs: and in Tobias seaven men were coupled  with Sara the daughter of Raguel: And in Daniel Nebucadnezzars Furnace was heated seaven times hotter then it was used to be, and seaven Lions were in the den, and the seaventh day came Nebucadnezzar. In the book of Job there is made mention of seaven sons of Job, and seaven dayes and nights Jobs friends sate with him on the Earth; and in the same place, In seaven troubles no evill shall touch thee. In Ezra we read of Artaxerxes his seaven counsellers: and in the same place the trumpet sounded: the seaventh moneth of the feast of tabernacles were in Ezraes time, whilest the children of Israel were in the Cities: and on the first day of the seaventh moneth Esdras read the Law to the people. And in the Psalmes David praised the Lord seaven times in a day: silver is tryed seaven times; and he renders to our neighbours seaven fold into their bosomes. And Solomon saith, that wisdom hath hewen her self seaven Pillars; seaven men that can render a reason, seaven abominations which the Lord abhors, seaven abominations in the heart of an enemy, seaven overseers, seaven eyes beholding. Isaiah numbers up seaven gifts of the Holy Ghost, and seaven women shall take hold on a man. And in Jeremiah, she that hath born seaven, languisheth, she hath given up the ghost. In Ezekiel, the Prophet continued sad for seaven dayes. In Zechariah seaven lamps, and seaven pipes to those seaven lamps, and seaven eyes running to and fro throughout the whole Earth, and seaven eyes upon one stone, and the fast of the seaventh day is turned into joy. And in Micah, seaven shepherds are raised against the Assyrians. Also in the Gospel we read of seaven blessednesses, and seaven vertues, to which seaven vices are opposed; seaven petitions of the Lords prayer, seaven words of Christ upon the cross, seaven words of the blessed Virgin Mary, seaven loaves distributed by the Lord, seaven baskets of fragments, seaven brothers having one wife, seaven disciples of the Lord that were fishers, seaven water pots in Cana of Galile, seaven woes which the Lord threatens to the Hypocrites, seaven divels  cast out of the unclean woman, and seaven wickeder divells  taken in after that which was cast out. Also seaven years Christ was fled into Egypt; and the seaventh hour the Fevour  left the Governors son. And in the Canonicall Epistles, James describes seaven degrees of wisdom, and Peter seaven degrees of Vertues. And in the Acts are reckoned seaven Deacons, and seaven disciples chosen by the Apostles. Also in the Revelations there are many mysteries of this number: for there we read of seaven Candlesticks, seaven Stars, seaven Crowns, seaven Churches, seaven Spirits before the Throne, seaven Rivers of Egypt, seaven Seales, seaven Markes, seaven Horns, seaven Eyes, seaven Spirits of God, seaven Angels with seaven Trumpets, seaven horns of the Dragon, seaven heads of the Dragon, who had seaven Diadems: also seaven plagues, and seaven Vials, which were given to one of the seaven Angells, seaven heads of the scarlet Beast, seaven Mountains, and seaven Kings sitting upon them, and seaven thunders uttered their voyces. Moreover this number hath much power, as in natural, so in sacred, Ceremoniall, and also in other things: therefore the seaven days are related hither, also the seaven Planets, the seaven, Stars called Pleiades, the seaven Ages of the World, the seaven changes of man, the seaven liberall Arts, and so many mechanick, and so many forbidden, seaven Colours, seaven Metalls, seaven holes in the head of a man, seaven pair of nerves, seaven Mountains in the City of Rome, seaven Romane Kings, seaven Civill Wars, seaven wise men in the time of Jeremiah the Prophet, and seaven wise men of Greece. Also Rome did burn seaven days by Nero. By seaven Kings were slain ten thousand Martyrs. There were seaven sleepers, seaven principall Churches of Rome, and so many Monasteries did Gregory build: So many sons Saint Felicity brought forth: there were seaven Electors of the Empire appointed, and seaven solemn Acts in crowning the Emperour; the Laws in the Testament require seaven witnesses, there are seaven civill punishments, and seaven canonicall, and seaven canonicall hours, the priest makes seaven obeysances in the Mass; seaven Sacraments, and seaven orders of the Clergy, and a boy of seaven years may be ordained by the lesser, and may obtein a benefice sine Cura. There are seaven penitentiall Psalmes, and seaven commands of the second table, and seaven hours were Adam,and Eve in Paradise, and there were seaven men foretold by an Angell before they were born, viz Ismael, Isaack, Sampson, Jeremiah, John Baptist, James the brother of the Lord, and Christ Jesus. Lastly, this number is most potent of all, as in good, so evill; of this Livy, the most ancient Poet sang,
The Pythagoreans call eight the number of justice, and fulness: first, because it is first of all divided into numbers equally even, viz into four, and that division is by the same reason made into twice two, viz by twice two twice; and by reason of this equality of division, it took to it self the name of justice, but the other received the name, viz of fulness, by reason of the contexture of the corporeall solidity, since the first makes a solid body. Hence that custome of Orpheus, swearing by eight dieties, if at any time he would beseech divine justice, whose names are these. Fire, Water, Earth, the Heaven, Moon, Sun, Phanes, the Night. There are also only eight visible Spheres of the heavens: also by it the property of corporeall nature is signified, which Orpheus comprehends in eight of his Sea songs. This is also called the covenant of circumcision, which was commanded to be done by the Jewes the eight day.
There were also in the old Law eight ornaments of the Priest, viz a breast-plate, a coat, a girdle, a myter, a robe, an Ephod, a girdle of the Ephod, a golden plate; hither\ belongs the number to eternity, and the end of the world, because it follows the number seven, which is the mysterie  of time: hence also the number of blessedness; for Christ teacheth so many degrees of blessednesses, as you may see in Matthew: It is also called the number of safety, and conservation, for there were so many souls of the sons of Jesse, from which David was the eighth. Also Zacharias, the father of John, received his speech the eighth day. They say this number was dedicated to Dionysius, because he was born the eighth moneth, in everlasting memory whereof, Naxos the Iland  was dedicated to him, which obtained this prerogative, that only the women of Naxos should safely bring forth in the eighth moneth, and their children should live, whereas the children of the eighth moneth in other Nations dy, and their mothers then bringing forth are in manifest danger.
The number nine is dedicated to the Muses, by the help of the order of the Celestiall Spheres, and divine spirits: Hence there are nine movable Spheres, and according to those there are nine Muses, viz Calliope, Urania, Polymnia, Terpsichore, Clio, Melpomene, Erato, Euterpe, Thalia, which nine Muses indeed are appropriated to the nine Spheres, so that the first resembles the supreme Sphere, which they call Primum mobile, and so descending by degrees, according to the written order, unto the last, which resembles the Sphere of the Moon, so, viz Calliope is appropriated to the Primum mobile; Urania to the Starry Heaven, Polymnia to Saturn, Terpsichore, to Jupiter, Cleo to Mars, Melpomene to the Sun, Erato to Venus, Euterpe to Mercury, Thalia to the Moon.
There are also nine orders of blessed Angels, viz Seraphim, Cherubim, Thrones, Dominations, Powers, Vertues, Principallities, Archangels, Angels, which Ezekiel figures out of nine Stones, which are the Saphir, Emrald, Carbuncle, Berill, Onyx, Chrysolite, Jasper, Topaze, Sardis: This number hath also a great, and Occult mysterie of the Cross: For the ninth hour our Lord Jesus Christ breathed out his Spirit. And in nine dayes the Ancients buryed  their dead, and in so many yeers  they say Minea received Laws from Jupiter in a Cave; whence this number was most especially taken notice of by Homer, when Laws were to be given, or answers were to be given, or the sword was like to rage. The Astrologers also take notice of the number nine in the Ages of men, no otherwise then they do of seven, which they call Climactericall years, which are eminent for some remarkable change. Yet sometimes it signifies imperfectness, and incompleatness, because it doth not attain to the perfection of the number ten, but is less by one, without which it is deficient, as Austin  interprets it out of the ten Leapers: Neither is the longitude of nine Cubits of Og King of Basan, who is a type of the divel, without a mysterie. The number ten is called every number, or an universall number, compleat, signifying the full course of life: for beyond that we cannot number, but by replication; and it either implies all numbers within it self, or explains them by it self, and its own, by multiplying them: wherefore it is accounted to be of a manifold Religion, and power, and is applyed to the purging of souls. Hence the Ancients called Ceremonies Denary, because they that were to be expiated, and to offer sacrifices, were to abstain from some certain things for ten dayes. Whence amongst the Egyptians it was the custome for him that would sacrifice to Io, to fast ten dayes before, which Apuleius testifies of himself, saying, It was commanded that I should for the space of ten dayes refrain all meat, and be fasting. There are ten sanguine parts of man, the Menstrues, the Sperm, the Plasmatick spirit, the Mass, the Humours, the Organicall body, the vegetative part the sensitive part, reason, and the mind. There are also ten simple integrall parts constituting man, the bone, cartilage, nerve, fibre, ligament, artery, vein, membrane, flesh, skin. There are also ten parts of which a man consists intrinsecally; The spirit, the brain, the lungs, the heart, the liver, the gall, the spleen, the kidnies, the testicles, the Matrix. There were ten Curtains in the Temple, ten strings in the Psaltery; ten musicall instruments with which Psalms were sang, the names whereof were, Neza, on which their Odes were sang, Nablum, the same as Organs, Mizmor, on which the Psalms, Sir, on which the Canticles; Tehila, on which Orations, Beracha, on which Benedictions, Halel, on which Praises: Hodaia, on which Thanks, Asre, on which the Felicity of any one, Hallelujah, on which the praises of God only, and Contemplations. There were also ten singers of Psalms, viz Adam, Abraham, Melchisedech, Moses, Asaph, David, Solomon, and three sons of Chora, there are also ten commandments; And the tenth day after the ascension of Christ the Holy Ghost came down. This lastly is the number, in which Jacob wrestling with the Angel all night overcame, and at the rising of the Sun was blessed, and called by the name of Israel. In this number Joshua overcame thirty one Kings, and David overcame Goliath, and the Philistines, and Daniel escaped the danger of the Lions. This number also is as circular as unity, because being heaped together, returns into a unity, from whence it had its beginning, and it is the end, and perfection of all numbers, and the beginning of tens. As the number ten flows back into a unity, from whence it proceeded, so every thing that is flowing is returned back to that from which it had the beginning of its Flux. So water returns to the Sea, from whence it had its beginning, the body returns to the Earth, from whence it was taken; time returns into Eternity, from whence it flowed, the spirit shall return to God that gave it; and lastly, every creature returns to nothing, from whence it was created, neither is it supported but by the word of God, in whom all things are hid; and all things with the number ten, and by the number ten, make a round, as saith Proclus, taking their beginning from God, and ending in him. God therefore that first unity, or one thing, before he communicated himself to inferiours, diffused himself into the first of numbers, viz The number three, then into the number ten, as into ten Ideas, and measures of making all numbers, and all things, which the Hebrews call ten Attributes, and account ten divine names; For which cause there cannot be a further number. Hence all tens have some divine thing in them, and in the Law are required of God as his own, together with the first fruits, as the originall of things, and beginning of numbers, and every tenth is as the end given to him, who is the beginning, and end of all things.
The number eleven as it exceeds the number ten, which is the number of the commandements, so it fals short of the number twelve, which is of grace and perfection, therefore it is called the number of sins, and the penitent. Hence in the tabernacle there were commanded to be made eleven Coats of hair which is the habit of those that are penitent, and lament for their sins, whence this number hath no Communion with Divine or Celestiall things, nor any attraction, or scale tending to things above: neither hath it any reward; but yet sometimes it receives a gratuitous favor from God, as he which was called the eleventh hour to the vineyard of the Lord, received the same reward as those who had born the burden, and heat of the day. Now the number twelve is divine, and that whereby the Celestials are measured; it is also the number of the Signs in the Zodiack over which there are twelve angels as chief, supported by the irrigation of the great name of God. In twelve yeers  also Jupiter perfects his course, and the Moon daily runs through twelve degrees. There are also twelve chief joynts  in the body of man, viz in hands, elbones, shoulders, thighs, knees, and vertebrae of the feet. There is also a great power of the number twelve in divine mysteries. God chose twelve families of Israel, and set over them twelve Princes; so many stones were placed in the midst of Jordan, and God commanded that so many should be set on the breast of the Priest; twelve Lyons  did bear the brazen Sea that was made by Solomon: there were so many fountains in Helim, and so many spies sent to the land of promise, and so many Apostles of Christ set over the twelve tribes, and twelve thousand people were set apart and chosen; the queen of Heaven crowned with twelve Stars, and in the Gospel twelve baskets of the fragments were taken up, and twelve Angels are set over the twelve gates of the City, and twelve stones of the heavenly Jerusalem. In inferior things many breeding things proceed after this number; so the Hare and Coney being most fruitfull, bring forth twelve times in the yeer, and the Cammel  is so many moneths in breeding, and the Pea-cock  brings forth twelve Eggs.
The other numbers also which are above twelve, are endowed with many, and various effects, the vertues whereof you must understand by their originall, and parts, as they are made of a various gathering together of simple numbers, or maner of multiplication. Sometimes as their significations arise from the lessening, or exceeding going before, especially more perfect, so they contain of themselves the signs of certain divine mysteries. So you see the third number above ten, shews the mysteries of Christs appearing to the Gentiles, for the thirteenth day after his birth a Star was a guide to the wise men. The fourteenth day doth typifie Christ, who the fourteenth day of the first moneth  was sacrificed for us; upon which day the children of Israel were commanded by the Lord to celebrate the Passeover. This number Mathew  doth so carefully observe, that he passed over some generations, that he might every where observe this number in the generations of Christ. The fifteenth number is a token of spirituall ascensions, therefore the song of degrees is applyed to that in fifteen Psalms. Also fifteen yeers  were added to the life of King Hezekiah: and the fifteenth day of the seventh moneth  was observed, and kept holy. The number sixteen, the Pythagorians call the number of felicity. It also comprehends all the Prophets of the Old Testament, and the Apostles, and Evangelists of the new. The number eighteen, and twenty, Divines interpret to be unhappy, for in the former, Israel served Eglon King of Moab; and in the other Jacob served, and Joseph was sold. And lastly, amongst creatures that have many feet, there is none that hath above twenty feet. The twenty two signifies the fullness of wisdom, and so many are the Characters of the Hebrew letters, and so many Books doth the old Testament contain. To the number twenty eight, the favour of the Moon is designed, for the motion thereof is distant from the course of other Stars, & as it were alone is compleated the twenty eighth day, when it returns to the same point of the Zodiake  from whence it came. Hence twenty eight Mansions of the Moon, having singular vertue, and influence, are numbered in the heavens. The number thirty is memorable for many mysteries, Our Lord Jesus Christ was baptized the thirtieth yeer  of his Age, and began to do miracles, and to teach the Kingdom of God. Also John Baptist was thirty yeers old when be began to preach in the wilderness, and to prepare the wayes of the Lord. Also Ezekiel at the same age began to prophecy; and Joseph was brought out of Prison on the thirtieth yeer of his Age, and received the government of Egypt from Pharaoh. The number thirty two, the Hebrew Doctors ascribe to wisdom, and so many paths of wisdom are described by Abraham. But the Pythagorians call this the number of Justice, because it is alwaies divisible into two parts, even unto a unity. The number fourty, the Ancients did honour with great observation, concerning which they did celebrate the feast Tessarosten: It is said that it doth conduce to the account of birth, for in so many daies the seed is fitted, and transformed in the womb, untill it be by its due, and harmoniacall proportions brought unto a perfect organicall body, being disposed to receive a rationall soul. And so many dayes they say women be, after they have brought forth, before all things are setled  within them, and they purifled, and so many dayes infants refrain from smiling, are infirme, and live with a great deal of hazard. This also is in Religion a number of expiation, and penitency, and signifying great mysteries. For in the time of the deluge the Lord rained fourty daye, and nights upon the earth: The children of Israel lived fourty yeers in the wilderness; fourty dayes the destruction of Nineveh was put off. The same number was accounted as holy in the fasts of the Saints: For Moses, Elias, and Christ fasted fourty dayes. Christ was carried fourty weeks in the womb of a Virgin, Christ tarryed fourty dayes after his birth at Bethelem  before he was presented in the Temple: He preached fourty months publickly: He lay fourty  hours dead in the Sepulchre, the fourtieth day after his resurrection he ascended into heaven, all which Divines say, were not done without some occult property, and mysterie of this number. The number fifty signifies remission of sins, of servitudes, and also liberty. According in the Law, on the fiftieth year they did remit debts, and every one did return to his own possessions. Hence by the yeer of Jubilee, and by the Psalm of repentance it shews a sign of indulgency, and repentance. The law also, and the holy Ghost are declared in the same: For the fiftieth day after Israels going forth out of Egypt, the Law was given to Moses in mount Sinai: The fiftieth day after the resurrection, the holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles in mount Sion; Whence also it is called the number of grace, and attributed to the Holy Ghost. The number sixty, was holy to the Egyptians, for it is proper to the Crocodile, that as she in sixty dayes brings forth sixty eggs, and so many dayes sits on them, so she is said also to live so many yeers, and to have so many teeth: and so many dayes every yeer to rest solitary without any meat. The number seventy hath also its mysteries, for so many yeers the fire of the sacrifice in the Babylonian Captivity lay under the water, and was alive: so many yeers Jeremiah foretold the destruction of the Temple, and so many yeers the Babylonian Captivity endured, and in so many yeers the desolation of Jerusalem was finished. Also there were seventy Palms in the place where the children of Israel pitched their Tents. The Fathers went down to Egypt with seventy souls. Also seventy Kings with their fingers, and toes cut off did gather meat under the table of Adonibezeck seventy sons came forth of the loins of Joas, seventy men, all sons of Jero, seventy weights of silver were given to Abimelech, and so many men Abimelech slew upon one stone: Abdon had seventy sons, and Nephews, who rod upon seventy Foals of Asses; Solomon had seventy thousand men which carried burdens. Seventy sons of King Ahab were beheaded in Samaria; seventy yeers, according to the Psalmist, are the Age of man. Lamech shall be avenged seventy seven fold; Thou shalt forgive thy brother if he offend against thee, seventy seven times. Also the number <seventy seven times. Also the number> seventy two was famous for so many languages, for so many Elders of the Synagogue, for so many interpreters of the old Testament, for so many Disciples of Christ: It hath also a great Communion with the number twelve; hence in the heavens, every sign being divided into six parts, there result seventy two fives, over which so many angels bear rule; and so many are the names of God; and every five is set over one Idiom with such efficacy, that the Astrologers, and Physiognomists can know from thence from what Idiom everyone ariseth. Answerable to these are so many manifest joynts in mans body, whereof in every finger and toe there are three, which together with the twelve Principal reckoned before in the number twelve make up seventy two. The number a hundred in which the sheep that was found, was placed, which also passeth from the left hand to the right, is found holy: and because it consists of tens it shews a complete perfection. But the Complement of all numbers is a thousand which is the four square measure of number ten, signifying a complete, and absolute perfection. There are also two numbers especially celebrated by Plato in his Repub.  and not disallowed by Aristotle in his Politicks, by which great mutations in Cities are foretold: These are the square of ten, and the four square measure thereof, viz the fourty four above a hundred, and seven hundred twenty eight above a thousand, which number is fatall: to which when any City, or Common Wealth hath attained, it shall afterward with a compleat four square measure decline: but in squares it undergoeth a change, but for the better, if it be governed with prudent discipline, and then it shall not with fate, but imprudency fall. And let thus much suffice for numbers in particular.
I have often read in the books of Magicians, and their works, and experiments certain, wonderful, & as they seemed to me ridiculous gesturings, and I did think they were certain occult agreements of the divels, by reason of which I did reject them: but after I did more seriously examine the matter, then I did presently understand that they were not the compacts of divels; but that there lay in them the reason of numbers, by which the ancients did by the various bending forward, and backward, their hands, and fingers represent numbers, by whose gesturings the Magiciand did silently signifie words unknown by sound, various with numbers, yet of great vertue, by their fingers joyned together, and sometimes changed, and did with sacred silence worship the Gods that rule over the world. The rites whereof Martianus also makes mention of in his Arithmetick, saying, The fingers of the Virgin were moved all manner of wayes, who after she went in, did by expressing seven hundred and seventeen numbers with her bended fingers call upon Jupiter. But, that these things may be the better understood, I shall bring something out of the sayings of Beda who saith, When thou sayest one, bend in the litle  finger on thy left hand, and set it in the middle of the Palme; when thou sayest two, place the next finger to the litle finger in the same place; when three, the middle finger after the same manner; when four, thou shalt lift up thy little finger; when five, the next to it after the same manner; when six, the middle, that finger alone which is called the ring finger, being fixt on the middle of the Palme: when thou sayest seve, thou shaly put only thy little finger above the root of thy Palm, tthe rest in the mean time being lifted up; and by it when thou sayest eight, thy ring finger; when thou sayest nine, thou shalt set thy middle finger contrary to them; when thou sayest ten, thou shall set the naile of thy fore-finger, or the middle joynt  of thy thumb. When thou sayest twenty, thou shalt put the top of thy middle finger close betwixt the joynts of thy thumb, and forefinger. When thou sayest thirty, thou shalt joyn the naile of thy thumb, and fore-finger lightly together. When thou sayest fourty, thou shalt bring the inside of thy thumb to the outside of thy fore-finger, both being lifted up. When thou sayest fifty, thou shalt bend thy thumb with the outward joynt like to the Greek Gamma to the Palme. When thou sayest sixty, compass about thy thumb being bended as before, with thy fore-finger bowed over it. When thou sayest seventy, thou shalt supply thy fore-finger being bowed about as before, with thy thumb stretched at length, the naile thereof being lifted up before the middle joynt of thy fore-finger. When thou sayest eighty, thou shalt supply thy fore-finger bowed about as before, with thy thumb stretched forth at length, the naile thereof being set upon the middle joynt of the fore-finger. When thou sayest ninty, thou shall set the naile of thy fore-finger bent into the root of thy thumb stretched out. Thus much for the left hand. Now thou shalt make. on thy right hand, as thou sisdt ten of thy left; and. on thy right, as thou didst twenty on thy left;'. on thy right, as thou didst two on thy left, and so to. Moreover when thou sayest. thou shalt put thy left hand upward on thy brest, thy fingers only being lifted towards Heaven. When thou sayest. thou shalt put the same spread forth upon thy breast. When thou sayest. thou shalt put thy thumb on the same hand downwards, on the cartilage of the middle of thy brest. When thou sayest. thou shalt lay the same upright, and stretched forth on thy navell. When thou sayest. thou shalt lay thy thumb of the same hand downard  on thy navell. When thou sayest. thou shalt hold thy left thigh with the same, being downards. When thou sayest. the same shalt put upon thy thumb upright. When thou sayest. thou shalt put the same downward on thy thigh. When thou sayest. thou shalt hold thy loyns  with the same, thy thumb being turned downwards. But when thou sayest. or. and so unto to. thou shalt in the same order as we have spoken, fill them up on the right part of thy body. But when thou sayest. thou shall joyn thy hands together, and clasp thy fingers one within the other. Let these suffice which have been observed out of Beda; Thou shalt finde more of these in Brother Luke of Saint Sepulchers, in his great Arithmetick.
The Pythagorians say (Aristotle, and Ptolemy  are of the same opinion) that the very Elements of letters have some certain divine numbers, by which collected from proper names of things, we may draw conjectures concerning occult things to come. Whence they call this kind of divination Arithmancy, because, viz it is done by numbers, as Terentianus hath made mention of it in these verses.
Also Pliny saith, That there was added to what Pythagoras invented, an uneven number of vowels of imposed names, which did betoken lameness, or want of eyes, and such like misfortunes, if they be assigned to the right side parts; but an even number to them of the left. And Alexandrinus the Philosopher taught, How that by the number of letters we may find out the ruling Stars of any one that is born, and whether the husband or wife shall dye  first, and know the prosperous, or unhappy events of the rest of our works. His traditions which were not disallowed by Ptolemy  the Astrologer we shall here add, and put under. But those numbers, which are deputed to each letter, we have above shewed in the Greek, and Hebrew letters, the Alphabet being divided into three Classes, whereof the first is of unites, the second of tens, the third of hundreds. And seeing in the Roman Alphabet there are wanting four to make up the number of twenty seven Characters, their places are supplyed with I, and V sinple consonants, as in the names of John, and Valentine, and hi, and hu aspirate consonants as in Hierom, and Huilhelme, although the Germans for hu the asperate use a double vv; the true Italians, and French in their vulgar speech put G joymed with U instead thereof, writing thus, Vuilhelmus, and Guilhelmus.
But if thou desirest to know the ruling Star of any one that is born, compute his name, and of both his parents, through each letter according to the number above written, and divide the sum of the whole being gathered together by nine, substracting it as often as thou canst; and if there remaine a unity, or four, both signifie the Sun; if two or seven, both signifie the Moon; but three, Jupiter; five, Mercury; six, Venus; eight, Saturne; nine, Mars; and the reasons thereof are shewed else where. In like manner if thou desirest to know the horoscope of any one that is born, compute his name, and of his Mother, and Father, and divide the whole collected together by twelve, if there remain a unity, it signifies the Lyon; if Junos dewce, Aquarius; if the Vestall three, Capricorn; if four, Sagittarius; if five, Cancer; if Venus six, Taurus; if Palladian seven, Aries; if Vulcans eight, Libra; if Mars his nine, Scorpio; if ten, Virgo; if eleven, Pisces; if Phoebus twelve, they represent Geminos; and the reasons of them are given elswhere. And let no man wonder that by the numbers of names many things may be Prognosticated, seeing (the Pythagorian Philosophers, and Hebrew Cabalists testifying the same) in those numbers lye  certain occult mysteries understood by few: for the most High created all things by number, measure, and weight, from whence the truth of letters, and names had its originall, which were not instituted casually, but by a certain rule (although unknown to us.) Hence John in the Revelation saith, Let him which hath understanding compute the number of the name of the beast, which is the number of a man. Yet these are not to be understood of those names, which a disagreeing difference of Nations, and divers rites of Nations according to the causes of places, or education have put upon men; but those which were inspired into every one at his birth, by the very Heaven with the conjunction of Stars, and those which the Hebrew Mecubals, and wise men of Egypt long since taught to draw from the generation of every one.
Moreover the Pythagorians have dedicated to the Element, and dieties  of Heaven sacred numbers; for to the Aire they have assigned the number eight, and to fire five, to the earth six, to the water twelve. Besides, unity is ascribed to the Sun, which is the only King of the Stars, in which God put his Tabernacle; and that this also is of Jupiter, doth the Causative power of his ideal and intellectuall species testifie, who is the head, and the father of the Gods, as unity is the beginning, and parent of numbers: The number two is ascribed to the Moon, which is the second great light, and figures out the soul of the world, and is called Juno, because betwixt that and unity there is the first conjunction, and neer fellowship; it is also ascribed to Saturn, and Mars, two unfortunate Planets with the Astrologers; so the number three is ascribed to Jupiter, the Sun, and Venus, viz three fortunate planets, and is deputed to Vesta, Hecata, and Diana; hence they say,
The number three therefore is dedicated to this Virgin whom they say to be powerfull in Heaven, and in Hell. The number four is of the Sun, which by that number constitutes the corners of the heavens, and distinguisheth seasons: it is also ascribed to Cyllenius, because he alone is called the four square God. The number five consisting of the first even, and the first odd, as of female, and male, both sexes, is assigned to Mercury; it is also attributed to the Celestiall world, which beyond the four Elements is it self under another form, the fist. The number six, which consists of two threes, as a Commixtion of both sexes, is by the Pythagorians ascribed to generation, and marriage, and belongs to Venus, and Juno. The number seven is of rest, and belongs to Saturn; the same also doth dispence the motion, and light of the Moon, and therefore is called by the name of Tritonia the Virgin, because it begets nothing. It is assigned to Minerva, because it proceeds of nothing; also to Pallas the Virago, because it consists of nuumbers, as of males, and females. This also Plutarck ascribes to Apollo. The number eight, by reason it containes the mysterie of justice, is ascribed to Jupiter; it is also dedicated to Vulcan, for of the first motion, and the number two, which is Juno drawn twice into it self, it consists; It is also attributed to Cybele the mother of the Gods, to whom every four square is attributed. Plutarck assigns it to Bacchus, or Dionysius, who is said to be born the eighth moneth: others, because Infants of the wight moneth do not live, have attributed it to Saturn, and the three Ladies of destiny. The number nine belongs to the Moon, the utmost receptacle of all Celestiall influences, and vertues, as also it is dedicated to the nine Muses, as also to Mars, from whom is the end of all things. The number ten is Circular, and belongs to the Sun, after the same manner as unity; also it is attributed to Janus, because it is the end of the first order, and from whence begins the second unity; it is also ascribed to the world. In like manner the number twelve, because the Sun going round twelve signes, distributes the yeer  into twelve moneths, is attributed to the world, the Heaven, and the Sun. The number eleven, because it is semicircular, is attributed to the Moon, and also deputed to Neptune.
It is affirmed by Magicians, that there are certain tables of numbers distributed to the seven planets, which they call the sacred tables of the planets, endowed with many, and very great vertues of the Heavens, in as much as they represent that divine order of Celestiall numbers, impressed upon Celestials by the Ideas of the divine mind, by means of the soul of the world, and the sweet harmony of those Celestiall rayes, signifying according to the proportion of effigies, supercelestiall Intelligencies, which can no other way be expressed, then by the marks of numbers, and Characters. For materiall numbers, and figures can do nothing in the mysteries of hid things, but representatively by formall numbers, and figures, as they are governed, and informed by intelligencies, and divine numerations, which unite the extreams of the matter, and spirit to the will of the elevated soul, receiving through great affection, by the Celestiall power of the operator, a power from God, applyed through the soul of the universe, and observations of Celestiall constellations, to a matter fit for a form, the mediums being disposed by the skill, and industry of Magicians; But let us hasten to explain the tables severally. The first of them is assigned to Saturn, and consists of a square of three, containing the particular numbers of nine, and in every line three every way, and through each Diameter making fifteen. Now the whole sum of numbers is fourty five. Over this are of Divine names set such names as fill up the numbers with an Intelligency to what is good, with a spirit to what is bad, and out of the same numbers is drawn the seal, or Character of Saturn, and of the spirits thereof, such as we shall beneath ascribe to its table. They say that this table being with a fortunate Saturn engraved on a plate of lead, doth help to bring forth, or birth, and to make a man safe, and powerfull, and to cause success of petitions with princes, and powers: but if it be done with an unfortunate Saturn, that it hinders buildings, plantings, and the like, and casts a man from honours, and dignities, and causes discords, and quarrellings, and disperses an Army. The second is called the table of Jupiter, which consists of a Quaternian drawn into it self, containing sixteen particular numbers, and in every line, and Diameter four, making thirty four. Now the Sum of all is. And there are over it divine names with an Intelligence to good, with a spirit to bad, and out of it is drawn the Character of Jupiter, and the spirits thereof. They say that if it be impressed upon a Silver plate with Jupiter being powerfull, and ruling, it conduceth to gain, and riches, favor, and love, peace, and concord, and to appease enemies, to confirm honors, dignities, and counsels, and dissolve enchantments if it be engraven on a corall. The third table belongs to Mars, which is made of a square of four containing twenty five numbers, and of these in every side and Diameter five, which make sixty five, and the sum of all is. And there are over it Divine names with an Intelligence to good, with a spirit to bad, and out of it is drawn the Character of Mars, and of his spirits. These with Mars being fortunate, being engraven on an Iron plate, or sword, makes a man potent in war, and judgments, and petitions, and terrible to his enemies, and victorious against them; and if engraven upon the Stone Correola, it stops blood, and the mestrues; but if it be engraven with Mars being unfortunate, on a plate of red Brass, it hinders buildings, casts down the powerfull from dignities, honors, and riches, and causeth discord, strife, and hatred of men, and beasts, chaseth away Bees, Pigeons, and Fish, and hinders Mils, and renders them unfortunate that go forth to hunting, or fighting, and causeth barreness in men and women, and other Animals, and strikes a terror in all enemies, and compels them to submit. The fourth table is of the Sun, and is made of a square of six, and contains thirty six numbers, whereof six in every side, and Diameter, produce, and the sum of all is. There are over it divine names with an Intelligency to what is good, with spirit to what is evil, and out of it is drawn Characters of the Sun, and the spirits thereof. This being engraven on a Golden plate with the Sun being fortunate, renders him that wears it to be renowned, amiable, acceptable, potent in all his works, and equals a man to Kings, and Princes, elevating him to high fortunes, inabling to do whatsoever he pleaseth: but with an unfortunate Sun, it makes a tyrant, and a man to be proud, ambitious, unsatisfiable, and to have an ill ending. The fifth table is of Venus, consisting of a square of seven drawn into it self, viz of fourty nine numbers, whereof seven on each side and Diameter make. and the sum of all is. And there are over it divine names with an Intelligency to good, and spirit to evil; And there is drawn out of it the Character of Venus, and the spirits thereof. This being engraven on a Silver plate, Venus being fortunate, procureth concord, endeth strife, procureth the love of women, conduceth to conception, is good against barreness, causeth ability for generation, dissolves enchantments, and causeth peace between man, and woman, and maketh all kind of Animals and Cattle fruitful; and being put into a Dove-house, causeth an increase of Pigeons. It conduceth to the cure of all melancholy distempers, and causeth joyfulness; and being carryed about travellers make them fortunate. But if it be formed upon Brass with an unfortunate Venus, it causeth contrary things to all that hath bin above said. The sixt table is of Mercury resulting from the square of eight drawn into it self, containing sixty four numbers, whereof eight on every side and by both Diameters make. and the sum of all. and over it are set divine names with an Intelligency to what is good, with a spirit to what is evil, and from it is drawn a Character of Mercury, and the spirits thereof; and if it be with Mercury being fortunate engraven upon Silver, or Tin, or yellow Brass, or be writ upon Virgin Parchment, it renders the bearer thereof gratefull, and fortunate to do what he pleaseth: it bringeth gain, and prevents poverty, conduceth to memory, understanding, and divination, and to the understanding of occult things by dreams: and if it be an unfortunate Mercury, doth all things contrary to these. The seventh table is of the Moon, of a square of nine multiplied into it self, having eighty one numbers, in every side and Diameter nine, producing. and the sum of all. And there are over it divine names with an Intelligency to what is good, and a spirit to what is bad. And of it are drawn the Characters of the Moon, and of the spirits thereof. This fortunate Moon being engraven on Silver, renders the bearer thereof grateful, aimiable, pleasant, cheerfull, honored, removing all malice, and ill will. It causeth security in a journey, increase of riches, and health of body, drives away enemies and other evil things from what place thou pleaseth; and if it be an unfortunate Moon engraven in a plate of Lead, where ever it shall be buried, it makes that place unfortunate, and the inhabitants thereabouts, as also Ships, Rivers, Fountains, Mills, and it makes every man unfortunate, against which it shall be directly done, making him fly from his Country, and that place of his abode where it shall be buried, and it hinders Physitians, and Orators, and all men whatsoever in their office, against whom it shall be made. Now how the seals, and Characters of the Stars, and spirits are drawn from these tables, the wise searcher, and he which shall understand the verifying of these tables, shall easily find out.
Geometricall Figures also arising from numbers, are conceived to be of no less power. Of these first of all, a Circle doth answer to Unity, and the number ten; for Unity is the Center, and circumference of all things; and the number ten being heaped together retuens into a Unity from whence it had its beginning, being the end, and complements of all numbers. A circle is called an infinite line in which there is no Terminus a quo, nor Terminus ad quem, whose beginning and end is in every point, whence also a circular motion is called infinite, not according to time, but according to place; hence a circular being the largest and perfectest of all is judged to be the most fit for bindings and conjurations; Whence they who adjure evil spirits, are wont to environ themselves about with a circle. A Pentangle also, as with the vertue of the number five hath a very great command over evil spirits, so by its lineature, by which it hath within five obtuse angles, and without five acutes, five double triangles by which it is surrounded. The interior pentangle containes in it great mysteries, which also is so to be enquired after, and understood; of the other figures, viz triangle, quadrangle, sexangle, septangle, octangle, and the rest, of which many, as they are made of many and divers insections, obtain divres significations and vertues according to the divers manner of draeing, and proportions of lines, and numbers. The Egyptians, and Arabians confirmed that the figure of the Cross hath very great power, and that is the most firm receptacle of all Celestial powers, and intelligencies, because it is the rightest figure of all, containing foure right angles, and it is the first description of the superficies, having longitude and latitude: And they said it is inspired with the fortitude of the Celestials, because their fortitude results by the straitness of angles and rayes: And stars are then most potent when they possess four corners in the figure of the heaven, and make a cross, by the projection of their rayes mutually. It hath moreover (as we shewed before) a very great correspondency with the numbers. '.'. most potent numbers. It was also reckoned by the Egyptian Priests, from the beginning of Religion amongst sacred letters, signifying amongst them allegorically the life of future salvation. It was also impressed on the Picture of Serapis, and was had in great veneration amongst the Greeks. But what here belongs to Religion we shall discuss elsewhere. This is to be observed, whatsoever wonderfull thing figures work when we write tham in Papers, Plates, or Images, they do not do it but by the vertue acquired from sublimer figures, by a certain affection which a natural apitude  or resemblance procures, in as much as they are exactly configured to them; as from an opposite wall the Eccho is caused, and in a hollow glass the collection of the solarie rayes, which afterward reflecting upon an opposite body, either wood, or any combustible thing doth forthwith burne it: or as an Harpe causeth a resounding in an other Harpe, which is no otherwise but because a sutable and a like figure is set before it, or as two strings on a Harpe being touched with an equall distance of time, and modulated to the same intention, when one is touched the other shakes also: Also the figures, of which we have spoken, & what characters soever concern the vertues of the Celestial figures as they shall be opportunely impressed upon things, those ruling, or be rightly framed, as one figure is of affinity with, and doth express an other. And as these are spoken of figures, so also they are to be understood of Geometrical bodies, which are a Sphear, a Tetracedron, Hexacedron, Octocedron, Icocedron, Dodecacedron, and such like.
Neither must we pass over what figures Phythagoras  and his followers, Timeus, Locrus, and Plato assigned to the Elements and Heavens: for first of all they assigned to the earth a four square, and a square of eight solid angles, and of twenty four plains, and six bases in form of a Dice to the fire, a Pryamis  of a four triangular basis, and of so many solid angles, and of twelve plaines; to the aire Octocedron, of eight triangular bases, and six solid angles, and twenty-four plains: and lastly, to Water they have assigned Icocedron  twenty bases, twelve solid angles: To the Heaven they have assigned Dodecacedron  of twelve five cornered bases, and twenty solid angles, and sixty plaines. Now he which knows the powers, relations, and proprieties of these figures, and bodies, shall be able to work many wonderful things in Natural and Mathematical Magick, especially in Glasses. And I knew how to make by them wonderful things, in which any one mught see whatsoever he pleased at a long distance.
Musical Harmony also is not destitute of the gifts of the Stars; for it is a most powerful imaginer of all things, which whilst it follows opportunely the Celestial bodies, doth wonderfully allure the Celestial influence, and doth change the affections, intentions, gestures, motions, actions and dispositions of all the hearers, and doth quietly allure them to its own properties, as to gladness, lamentation, to boldness, or rest, and the like; also it allures Beasts, Serpents, Birds, Dolphins to the hearing of its pleasant tunes. So Birds are allured with Pipes, and Harts are caught by the same. Fish in the lake of Alexandria are delighted with a noise. Musick hath caused friendship betwixt Men and Dolphins. The sound of the Harp doth lead up and down the Hyperborean Swans. Melodious voyces  tame the Indian Elephants: and the very Elements delight in Musick. The Hulesian fountain otherwise calm, and quiet, if the Trumpet sound riseth up rejoycing, and swells over its banks. There are in Lydia those which they call the Nymphs Ilands, which at the sound of a Trumpet forthwith come into the middle of the sea, and turning round lead a dance, and then are returned to the shores; M. Varro testifies that he saw them. And there are more wonderful things then these. For in the shore of Attica the sea sounds like a Harpe. A certain stone of Megaris makes a sound like a Harpe every time the string of a Harpe is struck; so great is the power of Musick, that it appeaseth the minde, raiseth the spirit, stirreth up souldiers  to fight, and refresheth the weary, calls back them that are desperate, refresheth travellers. And the Arabians say, that Camels carrying burdens are refreshed by the singing of their leaders. In like manner, they that carry great burdens, sing, and are thereby strengthened and refreshed: for asinging causeth delight and strength, pacifieth the angry, cheareth  up those that are sad and heavy, pacifieth enemies, moderates the rage of mad men, chaseth away vain imaginations: Hence it is that Democritus and Theophrastus affirm that some diseases of the body, and minde may thus be cured, or caused. So we read that Therpander, and Arion of Lesbos cured the Les*ians, and Ionians by Musick; and Ismenia of Thebes cured divers of very great diseases by Musick; Moreover, Orpheus, Amphion, David, Phythagoras, Empedocles, Asclepiades, Timotheus, were wont to do many wonderful things by sounds: Sometimes they did stir up dull spirits by familiar sounds; sometimess they did restrain wanton, furious, angry spirits by more grave tones. So David with a Harp moderated Saul in a rage. So Phythagoras  recalled a luxurious yong  man from immoderate lust. So Timotheus stirred up King Alexander to a rage, amd again repressed him. Saxo the Grammarian, in his History of the Danes, tells of a certain Musician, who boasted that he could by his Musick make every one that heard it to be mad; and when he was constrained by the Kings command to perform the same, he endeavoured to work severall wayes upon the affections; and first, by a tone of Musicall gravity filled the hearers with a kinde of sadness and unsensibleness; then by a more lively sound he made them rejoyce, and dance; and lastly, he by a more earnest Musick, reduced them to fury and madness. We read also, that they in Apulia that were touched with a kinde of dangerous Spider, were astonished untill they heard a certain sound, at the hearing of which every one riseth up and danceth. And it is believed (Gellius being witness) that they that are pained with the Sciatica, are eased at the sound of a Pipe. Also Theophrastus reports, that the sound of a Flute cures the biting of Spiders. And Democritus himself confesseth that the Consort of Pipers, hath been a cure for very many diseases.
Moreover we shall not dent, that there is in Sounds a vertue to receive the heavenly gifts; if with Pythagoras and Plato we thought the heavens to consist by an Harmonial composition, and to rule and cause all things by Harmonial tones and motions: Singing can do more then the sound of an Instrument, in as much as it arising by an Harmonial consent, from the conceit of the minde, and imperious affection of the phantasie  and heart, easily penetrateth by motion, with the refracted and well tempered Air, the aerious spirit of the hearer, which is the bond of soul and body; and transferring the affection and minde of the Singer with it, It moveth the affection of the hearer by his affection, and the hearers phantasie by his phantasie, and minde by his minde, and striketh the minde, and striketh the heart, and pierceth even to the inwards of the soul, and by little and little, infuseth even dispositions: moreover it moveth and stoppeth the members and the humors of the body. From hence in moving the affections harmony conferreth so much, that not onely natural, but also artificial and vocal Harmony doth yield a certain power both to the souls and bodies: but it is necessary that all Consorts proceed from fit foundations, both in stringed instruments, in pipes, and vocall singings, if you would have them agree well together: for no man can make the roaring of Lions, the lowing of Oxen, the neighing of Horses, the braying of Asses, the grunting of Hogs to be harmonious: neither can the strings made of Sheeps and Wolves gut, be brought to any agreement, because their foundations are dissonant; but the many and divers voyces  of men agree together, because they have one foundation in the species or kinde: so many birds agree, because they have one nigh genus or kinde, and a resemblance from above; also artificiall instruments agree with natural voyces, because the similitude that is betwixt them, is either true and manifest, or hath a certain analogy. But every harmony is either of sounds or voyces. Sound is a breath, voyce is a sound and animate breath; Speech is a breath pronounced with sound, and a voyce signifying something: the spirit of which proceedeth out of the mouth with sound and voyce; Chaludius  saith that a voyce is sent forth out of the inward cavity of the breast and heart, by the assistance of the spirit. By which, together with the tongue, forming, and striking the narrow passages of the mouth, and by the other vocall organs, are delivered forth articulate sounds; the elements of speech, by which Interpreter the secret motions of the minde are laid open: but Lactantius saith, that the nature of the voyce is very obscure, and cannot be comprehended how it is made, or what it is. To conclude, All Musick consisteth in voice, in sound, and hearing: sound without Air cannot be Audible, which though it be necessary for hearing, yet, as Aire, it is not of it self audible, nor to be perceived by any sense, unless by accident; for the Sight seeth it not, unless it be coloured, nor the Ears unless sounding, nor the Smell unless odoriferous, nor the Taste unless it be sapid, nor the Touch unless it be cold or hot, and so forth: Therefore though sound cannot be made without Air, yet is not sound of the nature of Air, not air of the nature of sound, but air is the body of the life of our sensitive spirit, and is not of the nature of any sensible object, but of a more simple and higher vertue, but it is meet that the sensitive soul should vivifie the air joyned to it; and in the vivificated air, which is joyned to the spirit, perceive the species of objects put forth into act, and this is done in the living air, but in a subtile and Diaphanous the visible species, in an ordinary air the audible, in a more gross air the species of other senses are perceived.
But understanding now, that of the seven Planets, Saturn, Mars, and the Moon have more of the voice then of the Harmony. Saturn hath sad, hoarse, heavy, and slow words, and sounds, as it were pressed to the Center; but Mars, rough, sharp, threatning  great and wrathful words: the Moon observeth a mean betwixt these two; but Jupiter, Sol, Venus and Mercury, do possess Harmonies; yet Jupiter hath grave, constant, fixed, sweet, merry, and pleasant Consorts; Sol venerable, settled, pure and sweet, with a certain grace; but Venus lascivious, luxurious, delicate, voluptuous, dissolute and fluent: Mercury hath Harmonies more remiss, and various, merry and pleasant, with a certain boldness: but the Tone of particulars, and proportionated Consorts obeyeth the nine Muses. Jupiter hath the grace of the octave, and also the quinte, viz the Diapason with the Diapente: Sol obtains the melody of the octave voice, viz Diapason; in like manner by fifteen Tones, a Disdiapason; Venus keepeth the grace of the quinte or Diapente. Mercury hath diatessaron; viz the grace of the quarte: Moreover the ancients being content with four strings, as with the number of Elements, accounted Mercury the Author of them, as Nicomachus reports, and by their Base strings would resemble the earth, by their Parhypas or middle the water; by their note Diezeugmenon, or Hyperboleon the fire; by the Paranete or Synemmenon, or treble, the Air; but afterwards Terpander the Lesb*an  finding out the seventh string, equalled them to the number of the Planets. Moreover, they that followed the number of the Elements, did affirm, that four humors, and did thin the Dorian musick to be consonant to the water and phlegm, the Phrygian to choler and fire, the Lydian to blood and air; the mixt Lydian  to melancholy and earth: Others respecting the number and vertue of the Heavens, have attributed the Dorian to the Sun, the Phrygian to Mars, the Lydian to Jupiter, the mixt Lydian  to Saturn, the Hypophrygian to Mercury, the Hypolydian to Venus, the Hypodorian to the Moon, the Hypo mixed Lydian  to the mixed Stars: Moreover they refer these modes of Musick to the Muses, and the strings to the Heavens, but not in that order as we have declared concerning the nine Muses, amongst our numbers and celestial souls; for they say Thalia hath no Harmony, therefore ascribe her to Silence, and the Earth; but Clio with the Moon move after the Hypodorian manner; the string Proslambanomenos or Air. Calliope and Mercury possess the Hypophrygian maner, and the Chord, Hypate-Hypaton, or B. Mi. Terpsichore with Venus the Hypolydian manner, and Parahypote, Hypaton; and for Melpomene and the Dorian manner with Licanos, Hypaton, or D. Sol. Re. are applied to the Sun. Erato with Mars keep the Phrygian fashion, and the Hypatemise, or E.la.mi. Euterpe, and the Lydian Musick, and Pachyparemeson agree with Jupiter; Polymnia and Saturn keep the mixt Lydian  manner, and Lichanos Meson D.Sol.Re. To Urania and the fixt Stars the Jypo mixt Lydian  Musick, and the string Mese, or A.le.mi.re are ascribed, as we reade them expressed in these Verses.
Moreover there are some who find out the harmony of the Heavens by their distance one from another. For the space which is betwixt the Earth and the Moon, viz an hundred and twenty six thousand Italian Miles, maketh the Intervall of a Tone; But from the Moon to Mercury being half that space, maketh half a Tone; And so much from Mercury to Venus maketh another half Tone; But from thence to the Sun, as it were a threefold Tone and a half; and makes Diapente; But from the Moon to the Sun, maketh a twofold Diatessaron with a half; Again from the Sun to Mars is the same space as from the Earth to the Moon, making a Tone; from thence to Jupiter half of the same making half a Tone; So much likewise from Jupiter to Saturn, constituting an half Tone, from whence to the starry firmament is also the space of an half Tone. Therefore there is from the Sun to the fixed Stars a Diatessaron distance of two tones and an half, but from the Earth a perfect Diapason of six perfect tones; moreover also from the proportion of the motions of the planets amongst themselves, and with the eight Sphere, resulteth the sweetest Harmony of all; for the proportion of the motions of Saturn to Jupiters motion, is two fold and an half; of Jupiter to Mars, a six fold proportion; of Mars to the Sun, Venus and Mercury, which in a manner finish their course in the same time, is a double proportion; but Saturns proportion to the starry Sphere is a thousand and two hundred, if it be true which Ptolomy saith, viz that, that Heaven is moved contrary to the primum mobile in an hundred yeers, one degree. Therefore the proper motion of the Moon being more swift, maketh a more acute sound then the starry firmament, which is the slowest of all, and therefore causeth the most base sound; But by the violent motion of the primum mobile, is the most swift, and acute sound of all; but the violent motion of the Moon is most slow and heavy, which proportion and reciprocation of motions yeelds a most pleasant Harmony; from hence there are not any songs, sounds, or musicall instruments more powerfull in moving mans affections, or introducing magicall impressions, then those which are composed of numbers, measures, and proportions, after the example of the Heavens. Also the Harmony of the Elements is drawn forth from their Bases, and Angles, of which we have spoken before; for between Fire and Aire, there is a double proportion in the Bases, and one and an half in solid Angles; again in Planes, a double; there ariseth hence an Harmony of a double Diapason, and a Diapente. Betwixt the Aire and Water, the proportion in their Bases is double, and one and an half; hence Dipason, and Diapente; but in their Angles double; Hence again Diapason; but between Water and Earth the proportion in the Bases, is threefold and a third part more; from hence ariseth Diapason, Diapente, Diatessaron; but in the Angles one and an half, again constituting Diapente. To conclude, betwixt Earth and Fire, in the Bases the proportion is one and an half, making Diapente; but in the Angles, double, causing Diapason; but between Fire, and Water, Aire and Earth, there is scarce any consonancy, because they have a perfect contrariety in their qualities, but they are united by the imtermediate Element.
Seeing man is the most beautifull and perfectest work of God, and his Image, and also the lesser world; therefore he by a more perfect composition, and sweet Harmony, and more sublime dignity doth contain and maintain in himself all numbers, measures, weights, motions, Elements, and all other things which are of his composition; and in him as it were in the supreme workmanship, all things obtain a certain high condition, beyond the ordinary consonancy which they have in other compounds. From hence all the Ancients in time past did number by their fingers, and shewed all numbers by them; and they seem to prove that from the very joynts of mans body all numbers measures, proportions, and Harmonies were invented; Hence according to this measure of the body, they framed, and contrived their temples, pallaces, houses, Theaters; also their ships, engins, and every kind of Artifice, and every part and member of their edifices, and buildings, as columnes, chapiters of pillars, bases, buttresses, feet of pillars, and all of this kind. Moreover God himself taught Noah to build the Arke according to the measure of mans body, and he made the whole fabrick of the world proportionable to mans body; from whence it is called the great world, mans body the less; Therefore some who have written of the Microcosme or of man, measure the body by six feet, a foot by ten degrees, every degree by five minutes; from hence are numbred sixty degrees, which make three hundred minutes, to the which are compared so many Geometrical cubits, by which Moses describes the Arke; for as the body of man is in length three hundred minutes, in breath fifty, in hight thirty; so the length of the Arke was three hundred cubits, the breadth fifty, and the height thirty; that the proportion of the length to the breadth be six fold, to the heighth ten fold, and the proportion of the breadth to the height about two thirds. In like manner the measures of all the members are proportionate, and consonant both to the parts of the world, and measures of the Archetype, and so agreeing, that there is no member in man which hath not correspondence with some sign, Star, intelligence, divine name, sometimes in God himself the Archetype. But the whole measure of the body may be turned, and proceeding from roundness, is knowen to tend to it again.
Also the four square measure is the most proportionated body; for, if a man be placed upright with his feet together, and his arms stretched forth, he will make a quadrature equilateral, whose center is in the botom  of his belly.
But if on the same center a circle be made by the crown of the head, the arms being let fall so far till the end of the fingers tough the circumference of that circle, and the feet spread abroad in the same circumference, as much as the fingers ends are distant from the top of the head; Then they divide that circle, which was drawn from the center of the lower belly, into five equale parts, and do constiturte a perfect Pentagon; and the Heels of the feet, having reference to the navile, make a triangle of equal sides.
But if the Heels being unmoved, the feet be stretched forth on both sides to the right and left, and the hands lifted up to the line of the head, them the ends of the fingers and Toes do make a square of equall sides, whose center is on the navile, in the girdling of the body.
Now let us proceed to particular measures. The compass of a man under the armpits contains the middle of his length, whose middle is the bottom of his breast: and from thence upward to the middle of his breast betwixt both dugges, and from the middle of his breast unto the crown of his head, on every side the fourth part; also from the bottom of his breast to the bottom of the knees, and from thence to the bottom of the ankles the fourth part of man. The same is the latitude of his shoulder-blades, from one extream  to the other: The same is the length from the elbow to the end of the longest finger, and therfore this is called a cubit. Hence four cubits make the length of man, and one cubit the bredth which is in the shoulder-blades, but that which is in the compass, one foot; now six hand-bredths make a cubit, four a foot, and four fingers bredths make a hand-bredth, and the whole length of man is twenty four hand bredths, of six foot, of ninty six fingers bredths. From the bottom of his breast to the top of his breast, is the sixth part of his length, from the top of his breast to the top of his forehead, and lowermost root of his hairs, the seventh part of his length; of a strong, and well set body, a foot is the sixth part of the length, but of a tall the seventh. Neither can (as Varro, and Gellius testifie) the tallness of mans body exceed seven feet. Lastly, the Diameter of his compass is the same measure as is from the hand, being shut unto the inward bending of the elbow, and as that which is from the breast to both dugs, upward to the upward lip, or downward to the navel; and as that which is from the ends of the bones of the uppermost part of the breast compassing the gullet; and as that which is from the sole of the foot to the end of the calf of the legg, and from thence to the middle whirle bone of the knee. All these measures are co-equall, and make the seventh part of the whole height. The head of a man from the bottom of the chin to the crown of his head is the eighth part of his length, as also from the elbow to the end of the shoulder-blade; So great is the Diameter of the compass of a tall man. The compass of the head drawn by the top of the forehead, and the bottom of the hinder part of the head, make the fift part of his whole length; So much also doth the bredth of the breast. Nine face-bredths make a square well set man, and ten a tall man. The length of man therefore being divided into nine parts, the face from the top of the forehead to the bottome of the chin is one; then from the bottom of the throat, or the top of the breast unto the top of the stomack  is another; from thence to the navell is a third; from thence to the bottom of the thigh, a fourth; from thence the hipp, to the top of the calf of the leg, makes two; from thence to the joynt of the foot the leggs make two more; all which are eight parts. Moreover the space from the top of the forehead to the crown of the head & that which is from the chin to the top of the breast, and that which is from the joynt of the foot to the sole of the foot, I say these three spaces joyned together make the ninth part. In bredth the breast hath two parts, and both Arms seven. But that body which ten face bredths make, is the most exactly proportioned. Therefore the first part of this is from the crown of the head to the bottome of the nose; from thence to the top of the breast, the second; and then to the top of the stomack  the third; and from thence to the navel, the fourth; from thence to the privy members, the fifth; where is the middle of the length of man, from whence to the soles of his feet are five other parts, which being joyned to the former, make ten whole, by which every body is measured by a most proportioned measure. For the face of a man from the bottom of his chin, to the top of his foreheadm and bottom of the hair is the tenth part. The hand of a man from the shutting, to the end of the longest finger is also one part; also betwixt the middle of both dugs is one part and from both to the top of the gullet is an equilaterall triangle. The latitude of the lower part of the forehead from one eare to the other is another part; the latitude of the whole breast, viz from the top of the breast to the joynts of the shoulder-blades, is on both sides one part, which make two. The compass of the head cross-wise from the distance of the eye-brows by the top of the forehead unto the bottom of the hinder part of the head, where the hair ends, hath also two parts; from the shoulders on the outside unto the coupling together of the joynts of the hand, and on the inside from the arm-pits unto the beginning of the palm of the hand, and of the fingers, are three parts. The compass of the head by the middle of the forehead hath three parts; the compass of the girdling place hath four parts in a well set man, but in a thin body three parts and a half, or as much as is from the top of the breast to the bottom of the belly. The compass of the breast by the arm-pit to the back hath five parts, viz as much as half the whole length. From the crown of the head, to the knurles of the gullet is the thirteenth part of the whole altitude. The arms being stretched upward, the elbow is even to the crown of the head. But now, let us see how equal the other commensurations are to one the other. As much as the distance is from the chin to the top of the breast, so great is the latitude of the mouth; as much as is the distance betwixt the top of the breast, to the navell, so great is the compass of the mouth; as much as the distance is from the chin to the crown of the head, so great is the latitude of the girdling place; as is the distance from the top of the nose to the bottom, such is the distance betwixt the chin, and the throat. Also the cavity of the eyes from the place betwixt the eye-brows unto the inward corners, and the extension of the bottom of the nose, and the distance from the bottom of the nose to the end of the upper lip; I say these three are equals amongst themselves; and as much as from the top of the nail of the forefinger to the lowermost joynt thereof.
As the Consonancy of the body consists of a due measure and proportion of the members: so the consonancy of the minde of a due temperament, and proportion of its vertues and operations which are concupiscible, irascible, and reason, which are so proportioned together. For Reason to Concupiscence hath the proportion Diapason; but to Anger Diatessaron: and Irascible to Concupiscible hath the proportion Diapente. When therefore the best proportionated soul is joyned to the best proportionated body, it is manifest that such a man also hath received a most happy lot in the distribution of gifts, for as much as the soul agrees with the body in the disposition of Naturals, which agreement indeed is most hid, yet after some maner shadowed to us by the wise. But to hasten to the Harmony of the soul, we must inquire into it by those Mediums by which it passeth to us, (i.e.) by Celestial Bodies, and Sphears; Knowing therefore what are the powers of the soul to which the Planets answer, we shal by those things which have been spoken of before, the more easily know their agreements amongst themselves. For the Moone governs the powers of increasing and decreasing; the Phantasie and Wits depends on Mercury; the Concupiscible vertue on Venus; the Vitall on the Sun; the Irascible on Mars; the Natural on Jupiter: the Receptive on Saturn: but the Will as the Primum Mobile, and the guide of all these Powers at pleasure, being joyned with the superior intellect, is always tending to good; which intellect indeed doth alwayes shew a pathway to the Will, as a Candle to the eye; but it moves not it self, but is the Mistriss  of her own operation, whence it is called Free Will; and although it alwayes tends to good, as an object sutable to it self: yet sometimes being blinded with error, the animal power forcing it, it chooseth evil, believing it to be good. Therefore Will is defined to be a faculty of the intellect, & Will wherby good is chosen by the help of Grace; and Evil, that not assisting, Grace therefore, which Divines call Charity, or infused Love is in the Will, as a first mover; which being absent, the whole consent falls into Dissonancy. Moreover, the soul answers to the Earth by Sense, to the Water by Imagination, to the Air by Reason, to the Heaven by the Intellect, and the soul goes out into an Harmony of them, according as these are tempered in a mortall body. The wise Ancients therefore knowing that the Harmonious dispositions of bodies and souls are divers, according to the diversity of the complexions of men, did not in vain use Musical sounds and singings, as to confirm the health of the body, and restore it being lost so to bring the minde to wholsome  manners, untill they make a man sutable to the Celestial Harmony, and make him wholly Celestial. Moreover, there is nothing more efficacious to drive away evil spirits then Musicall Harmony (for they being faln  from the Celestiall Harmony, cannot endure any true consent, as being an enemy to them, but fly from it) as David by his Harp appeased Saul, being troubled with an evil spirit. Hence by the ancient Prophets and Fathers, who knew these Harmonicall mysteries, singing and Musical sounds were brought into sacred services.
Every natural vertue doth work things far more wonderful when it is not onely compounded of a natural proportion, but also is informed by a choice observation of the Celestials opportune to this (viz when the Celestial power is most strong to that effect which we desire, and also helpt by many Celestials) by subjecting inferiors to the Celestials, as proper females to be made fruitful by their males. Also in every work there are to be observed, the situation, motion, and aspect of the Stars, and Planets, in Signs and Degrees, and how all these stand in reference to the length and latitude of the Climate; for by this are varyed the qualities of the angles, which the rays of Celestial bodies upon the figure of the thing describe, according to which Celestial vertues are infused. So when thou art working any thing which belongs to any Planet, thou must place it in its dignities, fortunate, and powerful, and ruling in the day, hour, and in the Figure of the Heaven. Neither shalt thou expect the signification of the work to be powerful, but also thoo must observe the Moon opportunely directed to this; for thou shalt do nothing without the assistance of the Moon: And if thou hast more patterns of thy work, observe them all being most powerful, and looking upon one the other with a friendly aspect: and if thou canst not have such aspects, it will be convenient at least that thou take them angular. But thou shalt take the Moon, either when she looks upon both, or is joyned to one, and looks upon the other; or when she passeth from the conjunction, or aspect of one to the conjunction or aspect of the other: for that I conceive must in no wise be omitted; also thou shalt in every work observe Mercury; for he is a messenger betwixt the higher gods, and infernal gods; when he goeth to the good he increaseth their goodness; when to the bad, hath influence upon their wickedness. We call it an unfortunate Sign, or Planet, when it is by the aspect of Saturn or Mars, especially opposite, or quadrant; for these are aspects of enmity; but a conjunction, or a trine, or sextile aspect are of friendship; betwixt these there is a greater conjunction: but yet if thou dost already behold it through a trine, and the Planet be received, it is accounted as already conjoyned. Now all Planets are afraid of the conjunction of the Sun, rejoycing in the trine, and sextile aspect thereof.
Now we shall have the Planets powerfull when they are ruling in a House, or in Exaltation or Triplicity, or term, or face without combustion of what is direct in the figure of the heavens, viz when they are in Angles, especially of the rising, or Tenth, or in houses presently succeeding, or in their delights. But we must take heed that they be not in the bounds or under the dominion of Saturn or Mars, least they be in dark Degrees, in pits or vacuityes. Thou shalt observe that the Angles of the Ascendent, and Tenth and Seventh be fortunate, as also the Lord of the Ascendent and place of the Sun and Moon, and the place of part of the fortune, and the Lord thereof, the Lord of the foregoing Conjunction & prevention: But that they of the malignant Planet fall unfortunate, unless haply they be significators of thy work, or can be any way advantagious to thee; or if in thy revolution or birth, they had the predominancy; for then they are not at all to be depressed. Now we shall have the Moone powerful if she be in her house, or exaltation, or triplicity, or face, and in degree convenient for the desired work, and if it hath a mansion of these twenty and eight sutable to it self and the work; Let her not be in the way burnt up, nor flow in course; let her not be in the Ecclipse, or burnt by the Sun, unless she be be in unity with the Sun; let her nor descend in the Southern latitude, when she goeth out of the burning, neither let her be opposite to the Sun, nor deprived of light, let her not be hindred by Mars, or Saturn. I will not here discourse any longer of these, seeing these, and many more necessary things are sufficiently handled in the Volums of Astrologers.
There is the like consideration to be had in all things concerning the fixt stars. Know this that all the fixt stars are of the signification and nature of the seven Planets; but some are of the nature of one Planet, and some of two. Hence as often as any Planet is joyned with any of the fixt stars of its own nature, the signification of that star is made more powerful, and the nature of the Planet augmented: but if it be a star of two natures, the nature of that which shall be the stronger with it shall overcome in signification; as for example, if it be of the nature of Mars, and Venus; if Mars shall be the stronger with it, the nature of Mars shall overcome; but if Venus, the nature of Venus shall overcome.
Now the natures of fixt stars are discovered by their colours, as they agree with certain Planets, and are ascribed to them. Now the colours of the Planets are these:
of Saturn, blew, and leaden, and shining with this:
of Jupiter citrine neer to a paleness, and clear with this;
of Mars, red, and fiery;
of the Sun, yellow, and when it riseth red, afterward glittering:
of Venus, white and shining; white with the morning, and reddish in the evening:
of Mercury, glittering;
of the Moon, fair. Know also that of the fixed stars by how much the greater, and the brighter and apparent they are, so much the greater and stronger is the signification; such are these stars which are called by the Astrologers of the first, and second Magnitude. I will tell thee some of these which are more potent to this faculty, as are viz the Navel of Andromeda in two and twentieth degree of Aries, of the nature of Venus, & Mercury; some call it Jovial, & Saturnine. The head of Algol in the eighteenth degree of Taurus, of the nature of Saturn and Jupiter. The Pleiades are also in the two and twentieth degree, a Lunary star by Nature and by complexion Martial. Also in the third degree of Gemini is Aldeboram, of the nature of Mars, and complexion of Venus: but Hermes placeth this in the twenty fifth degree of Aries. The Goat star is in the thirteenth degree of the said Gemini, of the nature of Jupiter, and Saturn; the greater Dog star is in the seventh degree of Cancer, and Venereal: the lesser Dog-star is in the seventeenth degree of the same, and is of the nature of Mercury, and complexion of Mars. The Kings star, which is called the Heart of the Lion, is in the one and twentieth degree of Leo, and of the nature of Jupiter and Mars; the tail of the greater Bear is in the nineteenth degree of Virgo, and is Venereal, and Lunary. The Star which is called the right wing of the Crow is in the seventh degree of Libra, and in the thirteenth degree of the same is the left wing of the same, and both of the nature of Saturn and Mars. The Star called Spica is in the sixteenth degree of the same, and is Venereal and Mercurial. In the seventeenth degree of the same is Alcameth, of the nature of Mars, and Jupiter; but of this when the Suns aspect is full towards it; of that when on the contrary. Elepheia in the fourth degree of Scorpio, of the nature of Venus, and Mars: The Heart of the Scorpion is in the third degree of Sagittarius, of the nature of Mars, and Jupiter: the falling Vulture is in the seventh degree of Capricorn, Temperate, Mercurial, and Venereal: The taile of Capricorn is in the sixteenth degree of Aquarius, of the nature of Saturn, and Mercury: The Star called the Shoulder of the Horse, is in the third degree of Piscis, of the nature of Jupiter and Mars. And it shall be a general rule for thee to expect the proper gifts of the Stars whilest they rule, to be prevented of them, they being unfortunate, and opposite, as is above shewed. For Celestial bodies, in as much as they are affected fortunately, or unfortunately, so much do they affect us, our works, and those things which we use, fortunately, or unhappily. And although many effects proceed from the fixt Stars, yet they are attributed to the Planets, as because being more neer to us, and more distinct and known, so because they execute whatsoever the superior Stars communicate to them.
The Sun, and Moon have obtained the administration or ruling of the Heavens, and all bodies under the heavens. The Sun is the Lord of all Elementary vertues, and the Moon by vertue of the Sun is the mistress of generation, increase, or decrease. Hence Albumasar saith, that by the Sun and Moon life is infused into all things, which therefore Orpheus cals the enlivening eyes of the heaven. The Sun giveth light to all things of it self, and gives it plentifully to all things not only in the Heaven, Aire, but Earth and Deep: whatsoever good we have, as Iamblichus saith, we have it from the Sun alone, or from it through other things. Heraclitus cals the Sun the fountain of Celestiall light; and many of the Platonists placed the soul of the world chiefly in the Sun, as that which filling the whole Globe of the Sun doth send forth its rayes on all sides as it were a spirit through all things, distributing life, sense and motion to the very Universe. Hence the ancient Naturalists called the Sun the very heart of heaven; and the Caldeans  put it as the middle of the Planets. The Egyptians also placed it in the middle of the world, viz betwixt the two fives of the world, i.e. above the Sun they place five Planets, and under the Sun, the Moon and four Elements. For it is amongst the other Stars the image and statue of the great Prince of both worlds, viz Terrestiall, and Celestiall; the true light, and the most exact image of God himself; whose Essence resembles the Father, Light the Son, Heat the Holy Ghost. So that the Platonists have nothing to hold forth the Divine Essence more manifestly by, then this. So great is the consonancy of it to God, that Plato cals it the conspicuous Son of God, and Iamblicus  cals it the divine image of divine intelligence. And our Dionysius cals it the perspicuous statue of God. It fits as King in the middle of other Planets, excelling all in light, greatness, fairness, enlightning  all, distributing vertue to them to dispose inferior bodies, and regulating and disposing of their motions, so that from thence their motions are called daily, or nightly, Southern, or Northern, Orientall, or Occidentiall, direct, or retrograde; and as it doth by its light drive away all the darkness of the night, so also all powers of darkness, which we read of in Job; Assoon as morning appears, they think of the shadow of death: And the Psalmist speaking of the Lyons  whelps seeking leave of God to devour, saith, The Sun is risen, and they are gathered together, and shall be placed in their dens; which being put to flight, it followes, Man shall go forth to his labor. The Sun therefore as it possesseth the middle Region of the world, and as the heart is in Animals to the whole body, So the Sun is over the heaven, and the world, ruling over the whole Universe, and those things which are in it, the very author of seasons, from whence day and year, cold and heat, and all other qualities of seasons; and as saith Ptolomy, when it comes unto the place of any Star, it stirs up the power thereof which it hath in the Aire. So as with Mars, heat; with Saturn, cold; and it disposeth even the very spirit and mind of man, from hence it is said by Homer, and approved by Aristotle, that there are in the mind such like motions, as the Sun the Prince and moderator of the Planets every day bringeth to us; but the Moon, the nighest to the Earth, the receptacle of all the heavenly Influences, by the swiftness of her course is joyned to the Sun, and the other Planets and Stars, every month, and being made as it were the wife of all the Stars, is the most fruitful of the Stars, and receiving the beams and influences of all the other planets and Stars as a conception, bringing them forth to the inferior world as being next to it self; for all the Stars have influence on it being the last receiver, which afterwards communicateth the influences ot all the superiors to these inferiors, and pours them forth on the Earth; and it more manifestly disposeth these inferiors then the others, and its motion is more sensible by the familiarity and propinquity which it hath with us; and as a medium betwixt both, superiors and inferiors, communicateth them to them all; Therefore her motion is to be observed before the others, as the parent of all conceptions, which it diversely issueth forth in these Inferiors, according to the diverse complexion, motion, situation, and different aspects to the planets and others Stars; and though it receiveth powers from all the Stars, yet especially from the Sun; as oft as it is in conjunction with the same, it is replenished with vivifying vertue, and according to the aspect thereof it borroweth its complexion; for in the first quarter, as the Peripatetickes deliver, it is hot and moist; in the second hot and dry; in the third, cold and dry; in the fourth cold and moist; and although it is the lowest of the stars, yet it bringeth forth all the conceptions of the superiors; for from it in the heavenly bodies beginneth that series of things which Plato calleth the Golden Chain, by the which every thing and cause being linked one to an other, do depend on the superior, even untill it may be brought to the supreme cause of all, from which all things depend; from hence is it, that without the Moon intermediating, we cannot at any time attract the power of the superiors. Therefore Thebit adviseth vs, for the taking of the vertue of any Star, to take the stone and herb of that plant, when the Moon doth either fortunately get under or hath a good aspect on that Star.
And seeing the Moon measureth the whole Zodiack in the space of twenty eight dayes; hence is it, that the wise-men of the Indians and ancientest Astrologians have granted twenty eight Mansions to the Moon, which being fixed in the eight sphere, do enjoy (as Alpharus saith) diverse names and proprieties from the diverse Signs and Stars which are contained in them, through which while the Moon wandreth, it obtaineth other and other powers and vertues; but every one of these Mansions, according to the opinion of Abraham, containth  twelve degrees, and one and fifty minutes, and almost twenty six seconds, whose names and also their beginnings in the Zodiack of the eight sphere, are these.
The first is called Alnath, that is the horns of Aries; his beginning is from the head of Aries of the eighth sphere; it causeth discords, and journies; the second is called Allothaim or Albochan, that is the belly of Aries, and his beginning is from the twelfth degree of the same sign, fifty one minutes, twenty two seconds compleat; it conduceth to the finding of treasures, and to the retaining of captives; The third is called Achaomazon or Athoray, that is, showring or Pleiades; his beginning is from the twenty five degrees of Aries compleat fourty two minutes, and fifty one seconds; it is profitable to Saylors, Huntsmen, and Alchymists; The fourth Mansion is called Aldebaram or Aldelamen that is the eye or head of Taurus; his beginning is from the eight degree of Taurus, thirty four minutes, and seventeen seconds of the same Taurus being excluded; it causeth the destruction and hindrances of buildings, fountains, wels, of gold-mines, the flight of creeping things, and begetteth discord. The fift is called Alchatay or Albachay; the beginning of it is after the twenty one degree of Taurus, twenty five minutes, fourty seconds; it helpeth to the return from a journey, to the instruction of scholars, it confirmeth edifices, it giveth health and good will; the sixth is called Alhanna or Alchaya, that is the little Star of great light; his beginning is after the fourth degree of Gemini, seventeen minutes, and nine seconds; it conduceth to Hunting, and besieging of Towns, and revenge of princes, it destroyeth Harvests and fruits and hindreth the operation of the Physitian. The seventh is called Aldimiach or Alarzach, that is the Arm of Gemini and beginneth from the seventeenth degree of Gemini, eight minutes and thirty four seconds, and lasteth even to the end of the sign; it conferreth gain and friendship, its profitable to Lovers, it scareth flyes, destroyeth Magisteries.
And so is one quarter of the heaven compleated in these seven Mansions; and in the like order and number of degrees, minutes and seconds, the remaining Mansions in evert quarter have their severall beginnings; namely so, that in the first signe of this quarter three Mansions take their beginnings, in the other two signs two Mansions in each; Therefore the seven following Mansions begin from Cancer, whose names are Alnaza or Anatrachya that is misty or cloudy, viz the eighth Mansion; it causeth love, friendship, and society of fellow travellers, it driveth away mice ands afflicteth Captives, confirming their imprisonment. After this is the ninth called Archaam or Arcaph, that is the eye of the Lyon; it hindreth Harvests and travellers, and putteth discord between men. The tenth is called Algelioche or Albgebh, that is the neck or forehead of Leo; it strengtheneth buildings, yeeldeth love, benevolence and help against enemies; the eleventh is called Azobra or Ardaf, that is, the hair of the Lyons  head; it is good for voyages, and gain by merchandize, and for redemption of Captives; the twelfth is called Alzarpha or Azarpha, that is the tayle of Leo; it giveth prosperity to Harvests, and Plantations, but hindreth Seamen, but it is good for the bettering of servants, Captives and companions. The thirteenth is named Alhaire, that is Dogstars, or the wings of Virgo; it is pravalent for Benevolence, gain, voyages, Harvests, and freedom of captives; the fourteenth is called Achureth or Arimet, by others Azimeth or Alhumech or Alcheymech, that is the spike of Virgo, or flying spike; it causeth the love of martyred folk, it cureth the sick, its profitable to Saylors, but it hindreth journies by land; and in these the second quarter of Heaven is compleated.
The other seven follow, the first of which beginneth in the head of Libra, viz the fifteenth Mansion, and his name is Agrapha or Algarpha, that is, covered, or covered flying; its profitable for the extracting of treasures, for digging of pits, it helpeth forward divorce, discord, and the destruction of houses and enemies, and hindreth travellers. The sixteenth is called Azubene or Ahubene, that is, the horns of Scorpio, it hindereth journyes and Wedlock, Harvests and Merchandize, it pervaileth for redemption of captives. The seventeenth is called Alchil, that is the Crown of Scorpio, it bettereth a bad fortune, maketh love durable, strengtheneth buildings, & helpeth Seamen; The eighteenth is called Alchas or Altob, that is the Heart of Scorpio; it causeth discord, sedition, conspiracy against princes and mighty ones, and revenge from enemies, but it freeth captives and helpeth edifices; the ninteenth is called Allatha or Achala, by others Hycula or Axala, that is the tayle of Scorpio; it helpeth in the besieging of Cities and taking of Towns, and in the driving of men from their places, and for the destruction of Sea-men, and perdition of captives. The twentieth is called Abnahaya, that is a beam; it helpeth for the taming of wild beasts, for the strengthening of prisons, it destroyeth the wealth of societies, it compelleth a man to come to a certain place. The one & twentieeth is called Abeda or Albeldach which is a desert; it is good for Harvests, gain buildings and travellers, and causeth divorce; & in this is the third quarter of Heaven is compleated.
There remaineth the seven last Mansions compleating the last quarter of heaven; the first of which being in order to the two and twentyeth, beginneth from the head of Capricorn, called Sadahacha or Zodeboluch, or Zandeldena, that is a pastour; it promoteth the flight of servants and captives, that they may escape, and helpeth the curing of diseases; the three and twentieth is called Zabadola or Zobrach that is swallowing; it maketh for divorce, liberty of captives and the health of the sick; the twenty fourth is called Sadabath or Chadezoad, that is the Star of fortune; it is prevalent for the Benevolence of marryed folk, for the victory of souldiers, it hurteth the execution of Government, and hindreth that it may not be exercised; The twenty fifth is called Sadalabra or Sadalachia, that is a Butterfly or a spreading forth; it helpeth besieging and revenge, it destroyeth enemies, maketh divorse, confirmeth prisons and buildings, hasteneth messengers, it conduceth to spels  against copulation, and so bindeth every member of man, that it cannot perform his duty; the twenty sixth is called Alpharg or Phragal Mocaden, that is the first drawing; it maketh for the Union and love of men, for the health of captives, it destroyeth prisons and buildings; The twenty seventh is called Alcharya or Alhalgalmoad that is the second drawing; it encreaseth Harvests, Revenues, Gain, it healeth infirmities, but hindreth buildings, prolongeth prisons, causeth danger to Seamen, and helpeth to infer mischiefs on whom you shall please; the twenty eight and last is called Albotham or Alchalcy, that is Pisces: it encreaseth Harvests and Merchandize, it secureth travellers through dangerous places; it maketh for the joy of marryed couples, but it strengthenth prisons, and causeth loss of treasures; and in these twenty eight Mansions do lye hid many secrets of the wisdom of the Ancients, by the which they wrought wonders on all things which are under the circle of the Moon; and they attributed to every Mansion his resemblances, Images, and seals, and his president intelligences, and they did work by the vertue of them after diverse manners.
Whosoever will work according to the Celestiall opportunity, ought to observe both or one of them, namely the motion of the Stars, or their times; I say their motions, when they are in their dignities or dejections, either essential or accidentall; but I call their times, dayes and hours distributed to their Dominions. Concerning all these, it is abundantly taught in the books of Astrologers; but in this place two things especially are to be considered and observed by us. One that we observe the motions and ascensions and windings of Stars, even as they are in truth in the eight sphere, through the neglect of which it happeneth that many err in fabricating the Celestiall Images, and are defrauded of their desired effect; the other thing we ought to observe, is about the times of choosing the planetary hours; for almost all Astrologers divide all that space of time from the Sun rising to setting into twelve equall parts, and call them the twelve hours of the day; then the time which followeth from the setting to the rising, in like manner being divided into twelve equall parts, they call the twelve hours of the night, and then distribute each of those hours to every one of the Planets according to the order of their successions, giving alwayes the first hour of the day to the Lord of that day, then to every one by order, even to the end of twenty four hours; and in this distribution the Magicians agree with them; but in the partition of the hours some do different, saying, that the space of the rising and setting is not to be divided into equall parts, and that those hours are not therefore called unequal because the diurnal are unequal to the nocturnall, but because both the diurnal and nocturnal are even unequall amongst themselves; therefore the partition of unequall or Planetaty hours hath a different reason of their measure observed by Magicians, which is of this sort; for as in artificiall hours, which are alwayes equall to themselves, the ascensions of fifteen degrees in the equinoctiall, constituteth an artificial hour: so also in planetary hours the ascensions of fifteen degrees in the Eclipticke constituteth an unequall or planetary hour, whose measure we ought to enquire and find out by the tables of the oblique ascensions of every region.
So great is the extent, power and efficacy of the Celestiall bodies, that not only naturall things, but also artificiall when they are rightly esposed to those above, do presently suffer by that most potent agent, and obtain a wondefull life, which oftentimes gives them an admirable Celestiall vertue; which thing Saint Thomas Aquinas that holy Doctor, thus confirmeth in his book de fæto, when he saith, that even garments, buildings and other artificiall works whatsoever, do receive a certain qualification from the Stars; so the Magicians affirm, that not only by the mixture and application of naturall things, but also in Images, Seals, Rings, Glasses, and some other Instruments, being opportunely framed under a certain constellation, some Celestiall Illustration may be taken, and some wonderfull thing may be received; for the beams of the Celestiall bodies betng animated, living, sensuall, and bringing along with them admirable gifts, and a most violent power, do, even in a moment, and at the first touch, imprint wonderfull powers in the Images, though their matter be less capable. Yet they bestow more powerfull vertues on the Images, if they be framed not of any, but of a certain matter, namely whose naturall, and also specificall vertue is agreeable with the work, and the figure of the image is like to the Celestial; for such an Image, both in regard of the matter naturally congruous to the operation and Celestiall influence, and also for its figure being like to the Heavenly one, is best prepared to receive the operations and powers of the Celestiall bodies and figures, and instantly receiveth the Heavenly gift into it self; then it constantly worketh on another thing, and other things do yeeld obedience to it. Hence saith Ptolemy  in centiloquio, that inferior things do obey the Celestiall, and not only them, but also even their Images; Even as earthly Scorpions obey not only the Celestiall Scorpion, but also his Image, if it shall be opportunely figured under his ascent and Dominion.
But the Celestial Images, according to whose likeness Images of this kinde are framed, are very many in the heavens: Some visible and conspicuous, others onely imaginable, conceived and set down by Egyptians, Indians and Chaldeans; and their parts are so ordered, that even the figures of some of them are distinguished from others: for this reason they place in the Zodiack circle twelve general images, according to the number of the signs: of these they constituting Aries, Leo, and Sagittary for the fiery and oriental triplicity, do report that its profitable against Feavors, Palsie, Drosie, Gout, and all cold and phlegmatick infirmities, and that it makes him who carrieth it to be acceptable, eloquent, ingenious and honorable, because they are the Houses of Mars, Sol, and Jupiter. They made also the image of a Lion against melancholy phantasies, the Dropsie, Plague, Feavors, and to expel diseases, at the hour of the Sun, the first degree of the sign of Leo ascending, which is the face and Decanate of Jupiter; but against the Stone, and diseases of the Reins, and against the hurts of beasts, they made the same image when Sol in the heart of the Lion obtained the midst of heaven: and again, because Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius do constitute the Aerial and Occidental Triplicity, and are the houses of Mercury, Venus, and Saturn, they are said to put to flight diseases, to conduce to friendship and concord, to prevail against melancholy, and to cause health; & they report that Aquarius especially freeth from the Quartane. Also, that Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, because they constitute the watry & Northern Triplicity, do prevail against hot and dry Fevors; also against the Hectick, and all cholerick passions; but Scorpio, because amongst the members it respecteth the privy parts, doth provoke to lust: but these did frame it for this purpose, his third face ascending, which belongeth to Venus; and they made the same against Serpents and Scorpions, poysons, and evil spirits; his second face ascending, which is the face of the Sun, and Decanate of Jupiter; and they report that it maketh him who carrieth it, wise, of a good colour; and they report that the image of Cancer is most efficacious against Serpents, and poysons, when Sol and Luna are in conjunction in it, and ascend in the first and third face; for this is the face of Venus, and the Decanate of Luna; but the second face of Luna, the Decanate of Jupiter: They report also that Serpents are tormented when the Sun is in Cancer: Also that Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, because they constitute the earthly and Southern triplicity, do cure hot infirmitiss, and prevail against the Synocall Feaver; it maketh those that carry it grateful, acceptable, eloquent, devout and religious, because they are the Houses of Venus, Mars, and Saturn: Capricorn also is reported to keep men in safety, and also places in security, because it is the exaltation of Mars.
There are besides in the Zodiack thirty six images, according to the number of the faces of the which, (as Porphyry saith) Teucer the Babylonian long since wrote, who was a most ancient Mathematician, after whom the Arabians also wrote of these things. Therefore it is said, that in the first face of Aries, ascendeth the image of a black man, standing and cloathed in a white garment, girdled about, of a great body, with reddish eyes, and great strength, and like one that is angry; and this image signifieth and causeth boldness, fortitude, loftiness and shamelesness; in the second face ascendeth a form of a woman, outwardly cloathed with a red garment, and under it a white, spreading abroad over her feet, and this image causeth nobleness, height of a Kingdom, and greatness of dominion: in the third face ariseth the figure of a white man, pale, with reddish hair, and cloathed with a red garment, who carrying on the one hand a golden Bracelet, and holding forth a wooden staff, is restless, and like one in wrath, because he cannot perform that good he would. This image bestoweth wit, meekness, joy and beauty: in the first face of Taurus ascendeth a naked man, an Archer, Harvester or Husbandman, and goeth forth to sow, plough, build, people, and divide the earth, according to the rules of Geometry; in the second face ascendeth a naked man, holding in his hand a key; it giveth power, nobility, and dominion over people: in the third face, ascendeth a man in whose hand is a Serpent, and a dart, and is the image of necessity and profit, and also of misery & slavery. In the first face of Gemini ascendeth a man in whose hand is a rod, and he is, as it were, serving another; it granteth wisdom, and the knowledge of numbers and arts in which there is no profit: in the second face ascendeth a man in whose hand is a Pipe, and another being bowed down, digging the earth: and they signifie infamous and dishonest agility, as that of Jesters and Juglers; it also signifies labours and painful searchings: In the third, ascendeth a man seeking for Arms, and a fool holding in the right hand a Bird, and in his left a pipe, and they are the significations of forgetfulness, wrath, boldness, jeasts, scurrilities, and unprofitable words: In the first face of Cancer ascendeth the form of a young Virgin, adorned with fine cloathes, and having a Crown on her head; it giveth acuteness of senses, subtilty of wit, and the love of men: in the second face ascendeth a man cloathed in comely apparrel, or a man and woman sitting at the table and playing; it bestoweth riches, mirth, gladness, and the love of women: in the third face ascendeth a man a Hunter with his lance and horne, bringing out dogs for to hunt; the signification of this is the contention of men, the pursuing of those who fly, the hunting and possessing of things by arms and brawlings. In the first face of Leo ascendeth a man riding on a Lion; it signifieth boldness, violence, cruelty, wickedness, lust and labours to be sustained. In the second ascendeth an image with hands lifted up, and a man on whose head is a Crown; he hath the appearance of an angry man, and one that threatneth, having in his right hand a Sword drawn out of the scabbard, & in his left a buckler; it hath signification upon hidden contentions, and unknown victories, & upon base men, and upon the occasions of quarrels and battels: in the third face ascendeth a young man in whose hand is a Whip, and a man very sad, and of an ill aspect; they signifie love and society, and the loss of ones right for avoiding strife. In the first face of Virgo ascendeth the figure of a good maide, and a man casting seeds; it signifieth getting of wealth, ordering of diet, plowing, sowing, and peopling; in the second face ascendeth a black man cloathed with a skin, and a man having a bush of hair, holding a bag; they signifie gain, scraping together of wealth and covetousness. In the third face ascendeth a white woman and deaf, or an old man leaning on a staff; the signification of this is to shew weakness, infirmity, loss of members, destruction of trees, and depopulation of lands. In the first face of Libra ascendeth the form of an angry man, in whose hand is a Pipe, and the form of a man reading in a book; the operation of this is in justifying and helping the miserable and weak against the powerful and wicked: in the second face ascend two men furious and wrathful and a man in a comely garment, sitting in a chair; and the signification of these is to shew indignation against the evil, and quietness and security of life with plenty of good things. In the third face ascendeth a violent man holding a bow, and before him a naked man, and also another man holding bread in one hand, and a cup of wine in the other; the signification of these is to shew wicked lusts, singings, sports and gluttony. In the first face of Scorpio ascendeth a woman of good face and habit, and two men striking her; the operations of these are for comliness, beauty, and for strifes, treacheries, deceits, detractations, and perditions; in the second face ascendeth a man naked, and a woman naked, and a man sitting on the earth, and before him two dogs biting one another; and their operation is for impudence, deceit, and false dealing, and for to lend mischief and strife amongst men; in the third face ascendeth a man bowed downward upon his knees, and a woman striking him with a staff, and it is the signification of drunkenness, fornication, wrath, violence, and strife. In the first face of Sagittariys ascendeth the form of a man armed with a coat of male, and holding a naked sword in his hand; the operation of this is for boldness, malice, and liberty: In the second face ascendeth a woman weeping, and covered with cloathes; the operation of this is for sadness and fear of his own body. In the third face ascendeth a man like in colour to gold, or an idle man playing with a staff; and the signification of this is in following our own wills,and obstinacy in them, and in activeness for evil things, contentions, and horrible matters. In the first face of Capricorn ascendeth the form of a woman, and a man carrying full bags; and the signification of these is for to go forth and to rejoyce, to gain and to lose with weakness and baseness: in the second face ascendeth two women, and a man looking towards a Bird flying in the Air; and the signification of these is for the requiring those things which cannot be done, and for the searching after those things which cannot be known: In the third face ascendeth a woman chast  in body, and wise in her work, and a banker gathering his mony  together on the table; the signification of this is to govern in prudence, in covetousness of money, and in avarice. In the first face of Aquarius ascendeth the form of a prudent man, and of a woman spinning; and the signification of these is in the thought and labour for gain, in poverty and baseness: in the second face ascendeth the form of a man with a long beard; and the signification of this belongeth to the understanding, meeknes, modesty, liberty and good maners: in the third face ascendeth a black and angry man; and the signification of this is in expressing insolence; and impudence. In the first face of Pisces ascendeth a man carrying burthens  on his shoulder, and well cloathed; it hath his significion in journeys, change of place, and in carefulness of getting wealth and cloaths: in the second face ascendeth a woman of a good countenance, and well adorned; and the signification is to desire and put ones self on about high and great matters: in the third face ascendeth a man naked, or a youth, and nigh him a beautiful maide, whose head is adorned with flowers, and it hath his signification for rest, idleness, delight, fornication, and for imbracings of women. And thus far concerning the Images of Faces. Besides these, there are as yet three hundred and sixty Images in the Zodiack, according to the number of the degrees, whose forms Petrus de Abano hath described: without the Zodiack there are also general Figures, which Hyginius and Aratus describe for us, and very many particular ones, according to the number of faces and degrees, existing therein, of all which to speak it would be too long; but of these the more principal are accounted, Pegasus which prevaileth against the diseases of horses, and preserveth horsemen in battle; Then is Andromache, which begetteth love betwixt husband and wife, so that it is said even to reconcile adulterers: Cassiopeia restoreth weak bodies and strengtheneth the members; Serpentarius chaseth away poysons, and cureth the bitings of venemous beasts: Hercules giveth victory in war; the Dragon with both the Bears maketh a man crafty, ingenious, valiant, acceptable to the gods and men: Hydra conferreth wisdom and riches, and resisteth poysons. Centaurus bestoweth health and long old age: Ara conserveth charity, and maketh one acceptable to the gods; Cetus maketh one amiable, prudent, happy both by sea and land, and helps him to recover his lost goods: the Ship affordeth security in the waters; the Hare prevaileth against deceits and madness; the Dog cureth the Dropsie, resisteth the plague, and also preserveth from beasts, and fierce creatures. Orion granteth victory: The Eagle giveth new honors, and preserveth the old. The Swan freeth from the Palsie and the Quartain: Perseus freeth from Envy and Witchcrafts, and preserveth from Lightnings and Tempests: The Hart preserveth Phrenetical and mad people. And thus much may suffice to have been spoken.
But now, what Images they did attribute to the Planets, although of these things very large volumes have been written by the ancient wise men, so that there is no need to declare them here, notwithstanding I will recite a few of them; for they made, from the operations of Saturn, Saturn ascending in a stone, which is called the Loadstone, the Image of a man, having the countenance of an Hart, and Camels seet and sitting upon a Chayr or Dragon, holding in his right hand, a sithe, in his left hand a dart; which image they did hope would be profitable for prolongation of life; for Albumasar in his book Sadar, proveth that Saturn conduceth to the prolongation of life; where also he telleth that certain regions of India being subject to Saturn, there men are of a very long life and dye  not unless by extream old Age: They made also an other Image of Saturn for length of dayes, in a saphire, at the hour of Saturn, Saturn ascending or fortunately constituted, whose figure was an old man setting upon an high chayre, having his hands lifted up above his head, and in them holding a fish or Sickle, and under his feet a bunch of Grapes, his head covered with a black or dusky coloured cloth, and all his garments black or dark coloured: They also make this same Image against the Stone and diseases of the kidnyes, viz in the hour of Saturn, Saturn ascending with the third face of Aquarius: they made also from the operations of Saturn, an Image for the encreasing in power, Saturn ascending in Capricorn; The form of which was an old man leaning on a staff having in his hand a crooked sickle, and cloathed in black. They also made an Image of melted Copper, Saturn ascending in his rising, viz in the first degree of Aries, or which is more true in the first degree of Capricorn, which Image they affirm to speak with a mans voyce; They made also out of the operations of Saturn, and also Mercury, an Image of cast metall, like a beautifull man, which they promised would foretell things to come, and made it on the day of Mercuy, on the third hour of Saturn, the sign of Gemini ascending, being the house of Mercury, signifying prophet, Saturn and Mercury being in conjunction in Aquarius in the ninth place of Heaven, which is also called God; Moreover let Saturn have a trine aspect on the ascendent, and the Moon in like manner, and the Sun have an aspect on the place of conjunction. Venus obtaining some Angle may be powerfull and occidentall; let Mars be combust by the Sun, but let it not have an aspect on Saturn and Mercury; for they said, that the splendor of the powers of these Stars was diffused upon this Image, and it did speak with men, and declare those things which are profitable for them.
From the operations of Jupiter, they made for prolongation of life, an Image, in the hour of Jupiter, Jupiter being in his exaltation fortunately ascending, in a clear and white stone, whose figure was a man crowned, cloathed with garments of a Saffron Colour, riding upon an Eagle or Dragon, having in his right hand a dart, about as it were to strike it into the head of the same Eagle or Dragon. They made also another Image of Jupiter at the same convenient season, in a white and clear stone, especially in Crystall, and it was a naked man crowned, having both his hands joyned together and lifted up, as it were deprecating something, sitting in a four-footed chair, which is carried by four winged boys, and they affirm that this Image encreaseth felicity, riches, honor, and conferreth Benevolence and prosperity, and freeth from enemies; They made also another Image of Jupiter for a religious and glorious life, and advancement of fortune; whose figure was a man having the head of a Lyon, or a Ram, and Eagles feet, cloathed in Saffron coloured cloathes, and he was called the son of Jupiter.
From the operations of Mars they made an Image in the hour of Mars, Mars being in the second face of Aries, in a Martiall stone, especially in a Diamond; The form of which was a man armed, riding upon a Lyon, having in his right hand a naked sword erected, carrying in his left hand the head of a man; they report, that an Image of this kind rendreth a man powerfull in good and evill, so that he shall be feared of all; and whosoever carryeth it they give him the power of enchantment, so that he shall terrifie men by his looks when he is angry, and stupifie them; they made another Image of Mars for the obtaining of boldness, courage, and good fortune in wars, and contentions, the form of which was a souldier armed and crowned, girt with a sword, carrying in his right hand a long Lance; and they made this at the hour of Mars, the first face of Scorpio ascending with it.
From the operations of the Sun, they made an Image at the hour of the Sun, the first face of Leo ascending with the Sun, the forme of which was a king crowned, sitting in a chair, having a Raven in his bosom, and under his feet a Globe; he is cloathed in Saffron coloured cloathes; They report that this Image rendreth men invincible, and honorable, and helps to bring their businesses to a good end, and to drive away vain dreams; also to be prevalent against feavers, and the plague; and they made it in a Balanite stone or a Rubin, at the hour of the Sun, when it in his exaltation fortunately ascendeth; They made another Image of the Sun in a Diamond, at the hour of the Sun, it ascending in his exaltation; the figure of which was a woman crowned with the gesture of one dancing and laughing, standing in a Chariot drawn with four horses, having in her right hand a looking glass, or buckler, in the left a staffe, leaning on her breast, carrying a flame of fire on her head; They report that this Image rendreth a man fortunate and rich, and beloved of all; and they made this Image, on a Corneoll stone at the hour of the Sun ascending in the first face of Leo, against Lunatick passions which proceed from the combustion of the Moon.
From the operations of Venus they made an Image, which was available for favor, and benevolence, at the very hour it ascending into Pisces, the form of which was the Image of a woman having the head of a bird, and feet of an Eagle, holding a dart in her hand. They made another Image of Venus for to get the love of women, in the Lapis Lazulus, at the hour of Venus, Venus ascending in Taurus, the figure of which was a naked maide with her haire spread abroad, having a looking glass in her hand, and a chain tyed about her neck, and nigh her a handsome young man holding her with his left hand by the chain, but with his right hand making up her hair, and they both look lovingly on one another, and about them is a little winged boy holding a sword or a dart. They made another Image of Venus, the first face of Taurus or Libra or Pisces ascending with Venus, the figure of which was a little maide with her hair spread abroad, cloathed in long and white garments, holding a Laurell Apple, or flowes in her right hand, in her left a Combe. Its reported to make men pleasant, jocand, strong, chearfull  and to give beauty.
From the operations of Mercury, they made an Image at the hour of Mercury, Mercury ascending in Gemini, the form of which was an handsome young man, bearded, having in his left hand a rod in which a serpent is twyned about, in his right carrying a dart, having his feet winged; They report that this Image conferreth knowledge, eloquence, diligence in merchandizing and gain; moreover to beget peace and concord, and to cure feavers; They made another Image of Mercury, Mercury ascending in Virgo, for good will, wit and memory; The form of which was a man sitting upon a chaire, or riding on a Peacock, having Eagles feet, and on his head a crest, and in his left hand holding a cock or fire.
From the operations of the Moon, they made an Image for travellers against weariness, at the hour of the Moon, the Moon ascending in its exaltation; the figure of which was a man leaning on a staffe, having a bird on his head, and a flourishing tree before him; They made another Image of the Moon for the increase of the fruits of the earth, and against poysons, and infirmities of children, at the hour of the Moon, it ascending in the first face of Cancer, the figure of which was a woman cornuted, riding on a Bull, or a Dragon with seven heads, or a Crab; and she hath in her right hand a dart, in her left a looking glass, clothed in white or green, and having on her head two Serpents with horns twined together, and to each arm a Serpent twined about, and to each foot one in like manner. And thus much spoken concerning the figures of the Planets, may suffice.
They made also the Image of the head and taile of the Dragon of the Moon, namely betwixt an Aeriall and fiery circle, the likeness of a Serpent, with the head of an Hawke tyed about them, after the manner of the great letter Theta, & they made it when Jupiter with the head obtaind the midst of Heaven: which Image they affirm to availe much for the success of Petitions, and would signifie by this Image a good and fortunate Genius, which they would represent by this Image of the Serpent; for the Egyptians and Phenicians  do extoll this creature above all others, and say it is a divine creature and hath a divine nature; for in this is a more acute spirit, and a greater fire than in any other, which thing is manifested both by his swift motion without feet, hands or any other instruments; and also that it often reneweth his age with his skin, and becometh young again: but they made the Image of the taile like as when the Moon Ecclipsed, in the Taile, or ill affected by Saturn or Mars, and they made it to introduce, anguish, infirmity and misfortune; and they called it the evill Genius; such an Image a certain Hebrew had included in a golden Belt full of Jewels, which Blanch the daughter of the Duke of Borbon (either willingly or ignorantly) bestowed on her husband Peter King of Spain, the first of that name, with which when he was girt, he seemed to himself to be compassed about with a Serpent; and afterwards finding the Magicall virtue fixed in the girdle, for this cause he forsook his wife.
They made also Images for evert Mansion of the Moon; in the first for the destruction of some one, they made in an Iron ring, the Image of a black man in a garment made of haire, and girdled round, casting a small lance with his right hand; they sealed this in black wax, and perfumed it with liquid Storax, and wished some evil to come. In the second, against the wrath of the Prince, and for reconciliation with him, they sealed in white wac and mastick, the Image of a king crowned, and perfumed it with Lignum Aloes; In the third, they made an Image in a silver ring, whose table was square, the figure of which was a woman well clothed, sitting in a chair, her right hand being lifted up on her head; they sealed it and perfumed it with muske, Camphire and Calamus Aromaticus. They affirmed that this giveth happy fortune and every good thing. In the fourth, for revenge, separation, enmity and ill will, they sealed in red wax the Image of a soldier sitting on an horse, holding a Serpent in his right hand; they perfumed it with red myrrhe, and Storax; in the fifth, for the favor of Kings and officers, and good entertainment, they sealed in Silver the head of a man, and perfumed it with Sanders; in the sixth, for to procure love betwixt two, they sealed in white wax two Images imbracing  one another, and perfumed them with Lignum Aloes and Amber; in the seventh, for to obtain every good thing, they sealed in Silom the Image of a man well clothed, holding up his hands to heaven as it were praying and supplicating, and perfumed it with good odors; In the eight, for victory in war, they made a seal of Tin, being an Image of an Eagle, having the face of a man, and perfumed it with Brimstone. In the ninth, to cause infirmities, they made a seal of Lead, being the image of a man wanting his privy parts, shutting his eyes with his hands; and they perfumed it with Rosin of the Pine. In the tenth, to facilitate child-bearing, and to cure the sick, they made a seal of gold, being the head of a Lyon, and perfumed it with Amber: In the eleventh, for fear, reverence and worship, they made a seal of a plate of gold, being the image of a man riding on a Lion, holding the ear thereof in his left hand, and in his right, holding forth a bracelet of gold, and they perfumed it with good odours and Saffron. In the twelth, for the separation of Lovers, they made a seal of black lead, being the image of a Dragon fighting with a man, and they perfumed it with the hairs of a Lion, and Assa fetida. In the thirteenth, for the agreement of married couples, and for the dissolving of charms against copulation, they made a feal of the images of both, of the man in red Wax, of the woman in white, and caused them to imbrace one another, perfuming it with Lignum Aloes and Amber. In the fourteenth, for divorce and separation of the man from the woman, they made a seal of red Coppcr, being the image of a Dog biting his tail, and they perfumed it with the hair of a black Dog, and black Cat. In the fifteenth, for to obtain friendship and good will, they made the image of a man sitting, and inditing of letterss, and perfumed it with Frankincense and Nutmegs. In the sixteenth, for to gain much Merchandizing they made a seal of Silver, being the image of a man sitting upon a Chair, holding a ballance  in his hand, and they perfumed it with well smelling spices. In the seventeenth, against Theeves  and Robbers, they sealed with an Iron seal the Image of an Ape: and perfumed it with the hair of an Ape. In the eighteenth, against Feavors  and pains of the belly, they made a seal of Copper, being the image of a Snake, holding his tail above his bead, and they perfumed it with Harts-horn, and reported the same seal to put to flight Serpents, and all venemous creatures from the place where it is buried. In the nineteenth for facilitating birth, & provoking the menstrues, they made a seal of copper, being the image of a woman, holding her hands upon her face; and they perfumed it with Liquid Storax. In the twentieth, for hunting, they made a seal of Tin, being the image of Sagittary, half a Man, and half an Horse, and they perfumed it with the head of a Wolf. In the twentie one for the destruction of some body, they made the image of a man with a double countenance, before and behinde, and they perfumed it with Brimstone and Jet, and did put it in a box of brass, and with it Brimstone and Jet, and the hair of him whom they would hurt. In the two and twentieth, for the security of Runaways, they made a seal of Iron, being the image of a man with wings on his feet, bearing an helmet on his head, and they perfumed it with Argent vive. In the three and twentieth, for destruction and wasting, they made a seal of Iron, being the image of a Cat, having a Dogs head, and they perfumed it with the hairs of a Dogs head, and buried it in the place where they did pretend to hurt. In the four and twentieth, for the multiplying of Heards of Cattle, they took the horn of a Ram, Bull, or Goat, or of that sort of cattle which they would increase, and sealed in it burning with an Iron seal, the image of a woman giving suck  her son, and they hanged it on the neck of that cattle who was the leader of the flock, or they sealed it in his horn. In the five and twentieth, for the preservation of Trees and Harvests, they sealed in the wood of a Fig-tree, the image of a man planting, and they perfumed it with the flowers of the Fig-tree, and did hang it on the tree. In the six and twentieth for love and favor, they sealed in white Wax and Mastick the image of a woman washing and combing her haires, and they perfumed it with things smelling very well. In the seven and twentieth for to destroy Fountains, Pits, Medicinal Waters and Baths, they made of red Earth the image of a man winged, holding in his hand an empty vessel, and perforated, and the image being burnt, they did put in the vessel Assafetida, and liquid Storax, and they did overwhelm and bury it in the Pond or Fountain which they would destroy. In the eight and twentieth, for to gather Fishes together, they made a seal of Copper, being the image of a Fish, and they perfumed it with the skin of a sea fish, and did cast it into the water, wheresoever they would have the fish to gather together. Moreover together with the foresaid Images, they did write down also the names of the Spirits and their Characters, and did invocate and pray for those things which they pretended to obtain.
But now for the operations of the fixed stars, according to Hermes opinion, under the head of Algol, they made an image whose Figure was the head of a man with a bloody neck; they report that it bestoweth good success to Petitions, and maketh him who carrieth it bold and magnanimous, and preserveth the members of the body sound: also it helpeth against Witchcraft, and reflecteth evil indeavors  and wicked incantations upon our adversaries. Under the constellation of Pleiades, they made the image of a little Virgin, or the Figure of a Lamp; its reported to increase the light of the eyes, to assemble Spirits, to raise Winds, to reveal secret and hidden things: Under Adlebora, they made an image after the likeness of God, or of a flying man; it giveth riches and honor: Under the Goat they made an image, the Figure of which was, as it were, a man willing to make himself merry with musical instruments; it maketh him who carrieth it acceptable, honored and exalted before Kings and Princes; and helpeth the pain of the teeth: Under the greater Dog-star, they made the image of an Hound and a little Virgin; it bestoweth honor and good will, and the favor of men, and Aerial spirits, and giveth power to pacifie and reconcile Kings, Princes, and other men: Under the lesser Dog-star they made the image of a Cock, or of three little maides; it conferreth the favor of the gods, of spirits, and men; it giveth power against Witchcrafts, and preserveth health: Under the Heart of Leo, they made the image of a Lion or Cat, or the Figure of an honorable Person sitting in a Chair; it rendretb a man temperate, appeaseth wrath, and giveth favour: Under the tail of Vrsa Major  they made the image of a pensive Man, or of a Bull, or the Figure of a Calf; it availeth against incantations, and maketh him who carrieth it secure in his travels: Under the wing of Corvus, they made the image of a Raven, or Snake, or of a black Man cloathed in black; this maketh a man cholerick, bold, couragious, full of thoughts, a backbiter, and causeth naughty dreams; also it giveth the power of driving away evil spirits, and of gathering them together; it is profitable against the malice of Men, Devils and Winds: Under the Spike they made the image of a Bird, or of a man laden with Merchandize; it conferreth riches, and maketh one overcome contentions, it taketh away scarcity and mischief: Under Alchameth they made the image of an Horse or Wolf, or the Figure of a man dancing; it is good against Feavers, it astringeth and retaineth the bloud: Under Elphrya, they made the image of an Hen, or of a man crowned and advanced; it bestoweth the good will and love of men, and giveth chastity. Under the Heart of Scorpio they made the image of a man armed, and with a coat of Male, or the Figure of a Scorpion; it giveth understanding and memory, it maketh a good colour, and aideth against evil spirits, and driveth them away, and bindeth them: Under the Vulture, they made the image of a Vulture or Hen, or of a traveller; it maketh a man magnanimous and proud, it giveth power over devils and beasts. Under the tail of Capricorn they made the image of an Hart, or Goate, or of an angry man; it bestoweth prosperity, and increaseth wrath. These are the images of some of the fixed stars which they command to be ingraven on their stones under them.
There are moreover certain other Figures, framed by the number and situation of the stars, and ascribed both to the Elements, and also to the Planets and Signs, which are called Geomantical, because that Geomantical Diviners do reduce the points of their lot projected, by the excess of parity or imparity into those figures; and they also being engraven or imprinted under the dominion of their Planets and Signs, do conceive the vertue and power of images; and these Figures are as a middle betwixt Images and Characters; But whosoever desireth exactly yo know the natures, qualities, proprieties, conditions, significations, and Nativities of these Figures, let him read the Volums of Geomancy; but they are in number sixteen, whose names and figures are these.
There remains as yet an other manner of images not according to the similitude of Celestiall figures, but according to the similitude of that which the mind of the worker desires, of whose they are the effigies, and representation: So to procure love we make images embracing one the other: to discord, striking one the other; to bring misery, or destruction as dammage  to a man, or house, or City or any thing else, we make images distorted, broken in members, and parts after the likeness and figure of that thing which we would destroy or damnifie; And Magicians advise us that in casting or engraving images we would write upon it the name of the effect; and this on the back when evill, as destruction; on the belly when good, as love. Moreover in the forehead of the image let be written the name of the species or Individuum which the image represents, or for whom or against whom it is made. Also on the breast let the name of the signe or face ascending, and Lord thereof be written; also the names and Characters of its Angles. Moreover in making the image they advise that prayer for the effect for which it is made, be used. All which Albertus Magnus in his Speculo affirms. Now they use the images being made diversly according to the vertues thereof; Sometimes they hang them or binde them to the body; Sometimes they bury them under the Earth, or a River; sometimes they hang them in a Chimny over the smoak, or upon a tree that they be moved by the wind; sometime with the head upward, & sometimes downward; sometimes they put them into hot water, or into the fire. For they say as the workers of the images do affect the image it self, so doth it bring the like passions upon those to whom it was ascribed, as the mind of the operator hath dictated it. As we read that Nectanabus the Magician made images of ships with wax after that manner, and art that when he drowned those images in water, that the ships of his enemies were in like maner drowned in the Sea, and hazarded. Now that part of Astrology which is writ concerning elections, teacheth us that the constellations also are to be observed for the making of images, and such like.
I will now shew thee the observation of Celestiall bodyes, which are required for the practise of some of these kind of images; So to make any one fortunate, we make an image in which these are fortunate, viz the significator of the life thereof, the givers of life, the signs, and Planets. Moreover let the ascendent, the middle of the heaven, and the Lords thereof be fortunate: also the place of the Sun, and place of the Moon; part of fortune, and Lord of conjunction or prevention made before their nativity, by depressing the Malignant Planets. But if we will make an image to procure misery, we must do contrarywise, and those which we place here fortunate, must there be infortunate, by raising malignant Stars. In like manner must we do to make any place, Region, City, or house fortunate. Also for destroying or prejudicing any of the foresaid; Let there be made an image under the ascension of that man whom thou wouldst destroy, and prejudice, and thou shall make unfortunate, the Lord of the house of his life, the Lord of the ascending, and the Moon, the lord of the house of the Moon, and the lord of the house of the lord ascending, and the tenth house, and the lord thereof. Now for the fitting of any place, place fortunes in the ascendent thereof; and in the first, and tenth, and second, and eighth house, thou shall make the lord of the ascendent, and the lord of the house of the Moon fortunate. But to chase away certain Animals from certain places, that they may not be generated, or abide there, let there be an image made under the ascension of that Animal, which thou wouldst chase away, and after the likeness thereof; as if thou wouldest chase away Scorpions from any place, let an image of the Scorpion be made, the sign of Scorpio ascending with the Moon, and thou shalt make unfortunate the ascendent, and lord thereof, and the Lord of the house of Mars; and thou shall make unfortunate the lord of the ascendent in the eighth house, and let them be joyned with an aspect malignant, opposite, or quadrant: and let there be writ upon the image the name of the ascendent, of the Lord thereof, and of the Moon, and of the lord of the day, and of the Lord of the hour. And let there be a pit made in the middle of the place, from which thou wouldst drive them; and let there be carryed into it, some of the earth taken out of the four corners of the same place, and let the image be buryed there with the head downward, with saying, this is the burying of the Scorpions, that they may not come into this place, and so of the rest. So for gain let there be made an image under the ascendent of the nativity of the man, or under the ascension of that place to which thou wouldest appoint the gain; and thou shall make the lord of the second house, which is in the house of substance to be joyned with the Lord of the ascendent in the trine or sextil, and let there be a reception amongst them; thou shall make fortunate the eleventh and the Lord thereof, and the eighth; and if thou canst, put part of the fortune in the ascendent, or second; and let the image be buryed in that place, or carryed from that place, to which thou wouldest appoint the gain. Also for concord, and love, let there be an image made in the day of Jupiter under the ascendent of the nativity of him whom thou wouldst have be beloved, make fortunate the ascendent, and the tenth, and hide the evil from the ascendent; and thou must have the Lord of the tenth, and planets of the eleveneth fortune, joyned to the Lord of the ascendent, from the trine or sextil with reception; then make an other image for him whom thou wouldest stir up to love; consider if he be a friend, or companion of him whom thou wouldst have be beloved; and if so, let there be an image made under the ascension of the eleventh house from the ascendent of the first image; but if the party be a wife, or a husband, let it be made under the ascension of the seventh; if a brother, or a sister, or a cousin, let it be made under the ascension of the third, and so of the like; and put the significator of the ascendent of the second image, joyned to the significator of the ascendent of the first image; and let there be betwixt them a reception, and let the rest be fortunate, as in the first image; afterwards joyn both images together into a mutual embraceing or put the face of the second image to the back of the first image, and let them be wrapt up in silk, and cast away or spoiled. Also for success of petitions, and for the obtaining of a thing denyed, or taken, or possessed by an other, let there be an image made under the ascendent of him who petitions for the thing; and cause that the Lord of the second be joyned with the lord of the ascendent from a trine, or sextile, and let there be a reception betwixt them, and if it can be, let the Lord of the second be in the obeying signs, and the Lord of the ascendent in the ruling, make fortunate the ascendent, and the Lord thereof, and take heed that the lord of the ascendent be not retrograde or combust, or falling, or in the house of opposition i.e. in the seventh from his own house; let him not be hindred by the malignant, let him be strong, & in an angle; Thou shalt make fortunate the ascendent, and the Lord of the second and the Moon; and make another image for him that petitioned to, and begin it under the ascendent belonging to him, as if he be a King or a Prince, begin it under the ascendent of the tenth house from the ascendent of the first image; If he be a father under the fourth; if a son under fifth, and so of the like; and put the significator of the second image, joyned with the lord of the ascendent of the first image, from a trine,or sextile, and let him receive it, and put them both strong, and fortunate without any let; make all evill fall from them. Thou shall make fortunate the tenth, and the fourth if thou canst, or any of them; and when the second image shall be perfected, joy nit  with the first, face to face, and wrap them in clean linnen, and bury them in the middle of his house who is the petitioner under a fortunate significator, the fortune being strong, and let the face of the first image be toward the North, or rather toward the place where the thing petitioned for doth abide; or if it happen that the petitioner goeth forward towards him with whom the thing petitioned for is, let him bring the images with him as far as he goes. And let there be made an image of dreams, which being put under the head of him that sleeps, makes him dream true dreams concerning any thing that he hath formerly deliberated of; and let the figure of that be the figure of a man sleeping in the bosome of an Angel, which thou shall make in the Lyon  ascending, the Sun keeping the nineth house in Aries; thou shalt writ upon the breast of the man the name of the effect desired, and in the hand of the Angel the name of the intelligence of the Sun. Let the same image be made in Virgo ascending, Mercury being fortunate in Aries in the ninth house, or Gemini ascending in Mercury being fortunate, and keeping the ninth house in Aquarius; and let it be received from Saturn with a fortunate aspect, and let the name of the spirit of Mercury be writ upon it. Let also the same be made in Libra ascending, Venus being received from Mercury in Gemini in the ninth house, by writting upon it the Angel of Venus. Besides also let the same image be made in Aquarius ascending, Saturn fortunately possessing the ninth house in his exaltation, which is in Libra, and let there be writ upon it the Angel of Saturn. Moreover let it be made in Cancer ascending the Moon being received by Jupiter and Venus in Pisces, and being fortunately placed in the ninth house, and let there be writ upon it the spirit of the Moon.
There are also made rings of dreams of wonderfull efficacy; and there are rings of the Sun, and Saturn and the constellation of them is when the Sun or Saturn ascend in their exaltations in the ninth house,  and when the Moon is joyned to Saturn in the ninth house, and in that signe, which was the ninth house of Nativity; and let there be writ upon the rings the name of the spirit of the Sun, or Saturn. Let this which hath been spoken suffice concerning images, for now thou mayst find out more of this nature of thy self. But know this that such images work nothing, unless they be so vivified that either a naturall or Celestiall, or Heroicall, or animasticall, or demoniacal, or angelicall vertue be in them, or assistant to them. But who can give a soul to an image, or make a stone to live, or mettal, or wood, or wax? and who can raise out of stones children unto Abraham? Certanly this Arcanum doth not enter into an Artist of a stiffe neck; neither can he give those things which hath them not. No body hath them but he who doth (the Elements being restrained, nature being overcome, the Heavens being over-powered) transcend the progress of Angels, and comes to the very Archetype it self, of which being then made a cooperator may do all things, as we shall speak afterwards.
We have spoken in the foregoing Chapters of the divers kindes of Divinations: But this is to be noted that all these require the use and rules of Astrology, as a key most necessary for the knowledge of all secrets; and that all kinds of Divinations whatsoever have their root and foundation in Astrologie so, as that without it they are of little or no use; yet Astrological Divination, in as much as the Celestials are causes and signs of all those things which are, and are done in these inferiors, doth give most certain demonstrations by the situation, and motion onely of Celestial bodies, of those things which are occult or future; of which we shall in this place speak no further, since of this Science huge Volums have been wrote by the Ancients, and are everywhere extant. Therefore whether the Physiognomists look upon the body, or countenance of forehead, or hand, or the Soothsayer, searcheth by dreams or Auspicia, that the judgment may be right, the figure of heaven is also to be enquired into. From the judgements whereof, together with conjectures of similitudes and signs, are produced true opinions of the significators. Also if any prodigie shall appear, the Figure of the heaven is to be erected; also such things are to be enquired after, which have gone before in the revolutions of years from great conjunctions, and Eclipses: then also the Nativities, beginnings, intronizations, foundations, and revolutions, perfections, directions of Princes, Nations, Kingdoms, Cities, when these shall appear, and upon what place of the Celestial figure these fell; that by all these at length we may come to a rational and probable signification of these things. After the same manner, but with less labour, we must proceed in the Expofition of dreams. Moreover, they that being distempered foretell future things, do it not but as they are instigated by the stars, or inferior instruments of these, whence their Predictions must at length be imputed to the Celestials, as we read in Lucan the old Prophet Tuscus,
After the City was viewed, the Sacrifice slain, the inspection into the intrals did at length by the dispositions of the Celestial stars pronounce judgement. Also Geornancy it self the most accurate of Divinations, which divines by points of the earth, or any other superfices, or by a fall, or any other power inscribed, doth first reduce them to Celestial figures, viz to those sixteen which we above named, making judgement after an Astrological manner, by the properties and observations thereof: and hither are referred all natural Divinations by lots whatsoever, the power whereof can be from no where else then from the heaven, and from the minde of them that work them. For whatsoever is moved, caused or produced in these inferiors, must of necessity imitate the motions, and influences of the superiours, to which, as to its roots, causes, and signs it is reduced, the judgement whereof is shewed by Astrological Rules. Hence Dice, Tetracedron, Exacedron, Octocedron, Doderacedron, Icocedron being made by certain Numbers, Signs, and Stars at opportune times, under the influencies of the Celestials, and being inscribed, obtain a wonderful vertue of Divining, and foretelling by their castings, such as those Dice Preneste had, in which we read the Destinies of the Romans were contained.
Whatsoever Divinations and Predictions of humane events are made by Lottery, must of necessity, besides the lot, have some sublime occult cause; which indeed shall not be a cause by accident, such as Aristotle describes Fortune to be. For in the series of Causes, seeing according to the Platonists, a cause by accident can never be the prime and sufficient cause, we must look higher, and finde out a cause which may know and intend the effect. Now this we must not place in corporeal Nature, but in immaterial, and incorporeal substances which indeed administer the Lot, and dispence  the signification of the truth, as in mens souls, or separated spirits, or in Celestial Intelligcnces, or in God himself. Now that there is in mans soul a sufficient power and vertue to direct such kinde Of lots, it is hence manifest, because there is in our soul a divine vertue, and similitude, and apprehension, and power of all things; And as we said in the first Book, All things have a natural obedience to it, and of necessity have a motion and efficacy to that which the soul desires with a strong desire; and all the vertues and operations of natural and artifical things, obey it when it is carried forth into the excess of desire, and then all Lots of what kinde soever are assisting to the appetite of such a minde, and acquire to themselves wonderful vertues of passages, as from that, so from the Celestial opportunity in that hour in which the excess of such a like appetite doth most of all exeeed in it. And this is that ground and foundation of all Astrological questions, wherefore the minde being elevated into the excess of any desire, taketh of it self an hour and opportunity most convenient and efficacious, on which the Figure of the heaven being made, the Astrologer may then judge in it, and plainly know concerning that which any one desires, and is inquisitive to know. But now because Lots are not directed alwayes by mans minde, but also, as we said before, by the help of other Spirits; nor is the minde of a Prophet alwayes disposed to that excess of passion as we spoke of: hence amongst the Ancients, it was a Custome to premise before the casting of the Lot, some sacred performances, in which they called upon divine Intelligencies and spirits for to direct the Lot aright. Whatsoever kinde of presage therefore these kinde of Lots portend, must of necessity not be by chance or fortune, but from a spiritual cause, by vertue whereof the Phantasie, or hand of him that cast the Lot is moved, whether that power proceed from the soul of the Operator through the great excess of his affection, or from a Celestial influence, and oppotunity, or from a certain Diety or spirit assisting, or moving from on high, whether these Lots are placed in casting of Cockalls, or throwing of Dice, or in the meeting of Verses, such as were formerly the Lot of Homer and Virgil, of which we read in Ælius of Sparta, Hadrianus long since made enquiry, and which we read befell Trajanus the Emperour.
Be which Verses he did not in vain become to have hopes of enjoying the Empire. Also amongst Hebrews, and even amongst us Christians (some Divines not dispproving of it) Lots are taken out of Verses of Psalms. There are also more, & other kindes of Lots, as are humane Lots, which had no Divination in them amongst the Ancients, and are observed by as in choosing of Magistrates, to prevent envy, of which also Cicero against Verres makes mention: but they are not of our purpose: But those which are divine, and sacred Lots, respecting Oracles, and Religion, of which we shall discourse in the following Book: Onely thus far I would advise you, that how much presaging, divining or Southsaying  soever Lots are found to have, they have them not as they are Lots, but by reason of a vertue of a higher operation joyned to them.
It is necessity that the heaven and Celestial bodies, seeing they have a power, influence, and manifest operation upon these inferiors, should be animated: seeing an operition cannot proceed from a meer body. All famous Poets, and Philosophers affirm therefore that the world and all Celestiall bodies must have a soul, and that also intelligent: Hence Marcus Mavillius in his Astronomy to Augustus, sings,
For what do these verses seem to mean, then that the world should not only have a spirit soul, but also to partake of the divine mind: and that the originall, vertue, and vigour of all inferiour things do depend on the soul of the world? This do all Platonists, Pythagorians, Orpheus, Trismegistus, Aristotle, Theophrastus, Avicen, Algazeles, and all Peripateticks confess, and confirm.
The world, the heavens, the Stars, and the Elements have a soul, with which they cause a soul in these inferior and mixed bodies. They have also as we said in the former book, a spirit, which by the mediating of the soul is united to the body: For as the world is a certain whole body, the parts whereof are the bodies of all living creatures, and by how much the whole is more perfect and noble then the parts, by so much more perfect, and noble is the body of the world then the bodies of each living thing. It would be absurd, that all imperfect bodies and parts of the world, and every base Animal, as Flies, and Worms should be worthy of a life, and have a life and soul, and the whole entire world a most perfect, whole, and most noble body, should have neither life, nor soul; It is no less absurd, that Heavens, Stars, Elements, which give to all things life, and soul most largely, should themselves be without life, and soul; and that every plant, or tree should be of a more noble condition then the Heaven, Stars, and Elements, which are naturally the cause of them; And what living man can deny that earth, and water live, which of themselves, generate, vivifie, nourish, and increase innumerable trees, plants, and living creatures? as most manifestly appears in things that breed of their own accord, and in those which have no corporeall seed. Neither could Elements generate and nourish such kind of living creatures, if they themselves were without life or soul. But some haply may say, that such kind of living creatures are not generated by the soul of the earth, or water, but by the influencies of Celestiall souls; These the Platonists answer, that an Accident cannot beget a substance, unless haply as an instrument it be subjected to the next substance, because an instrument removed from an artificer is not moved to the effect of the art; so also those Celestiall influencies, seeing they are certain accidents being removed far from vital substances, or from the life it self, cannot generate a vital substance in these inferiors. And Mercurius in his book which he cals De Communi, saith, All that is in the world is moved either by increase, or decrease. Now what moves, must needs have life; and seeing that all things move, even the earth, especially with a generative and alterative motion, they must themselves live. And if any doubt that the heavens live, saith Theophrastus, he is not to be accounted a Philosopher; and he which denyes the heaven to be animated, so that the mover thereof is not the form thereof, destroyes the foundation of all Philosophy; The World therefore lives, hath a soul, and sense; for it gives life to plants, which are not produced of seed; and it gives sense to Animals, which are not generated by coition.
That the above named souls have reason, is apparent hence; For whereas the universall works of the foresaid souls do with a certain perpetuall order conspire amongst themselves, it is necessary that they be governed not by chance but by reason; by which reason they do direct, & bring all their operations to a certainty. For it is necessary that the earth should have the reason of terrene things, and water of watery things; and so in the rest; by which reason each in their time, place, and order are generated, and being hurt are repaired. Therefore Philosophers do not think the soul of the earth to be at it were the soul of some contemptible body, but to be rationall and also intelligent, yea and to be a diety. Besides it would be absurd, seeing we have reasons of our works, that Celestiall souls, and the soul of the universe should not have reasons of theirs. But if (as saith Plato) the world be made by very goodness it self, as well as it could be made, it is certainly endowed with not only life, sense, and reason, but also understanding. For the perfection of a body is its soul, and that body is more perfect which hath a more perfect soul; It is necessary therefore, seeing Celestiall bodies are more perfect, that they have also most perfect minds. They partake therefore of an intellect and a minde; which the Platonists also prove by the perseverance of their order, and tenor, because motion is of its nature free, it may easily swarve, and wander now one way, now another, unless it were ruled by an intellect and a mind, and that also by a perfect mind foreseeing from the beginning the best way, and chief end. Which perfect mind indeed, becaue it is most powerfull in the soul, as is the soul, and as are the souls of Celestiall bodies, and of Elements, without all doubt doth most orderly, and perfectly govern the work allotted to it. For bodies do not resist a most powerfull soul, and a perfect mind doth not change its counsel. The soul of the world therefore is a certain only thing, filling all things, bestowing all things, binding, and knitting together all things, that it might make one frame of the world, and that it might be as it were one instrument making of many strings, but one sound, sounding from three kinds of creatures, intellectall, Celestiall, and incorruptible, with one only breath and life.
The names of Celestiall souls are very many, and diverse according to their manifold power and vertue upon these inferior things, from whence they have received divers names, which the ancients in their hymnes and prayer made use of. Concerning which you must observe, that every one of these souls according to Orpheuss Divinity, is said to have a double vertue; the one placed in knowing, the other in vivifying, and governing its body. Upon this account in the Celestiall spheres, Orpheus cals the former vertue Bacchus, the other a Muse. Hence he is not inebriated by any Bacchus, who hath not first been coupled to his Muse. Therefore nine Bacchuss are designed about the nine Muses. Hence in the ninth sphere Orpheus puts Bacchus Cribonius, and the Muse Calliope; in the starry heaven Picionius, and Urania; in the sphere of Saturn, Amphietus, and Polyphymnia; in the sphere of Jupiter, Sabasius, and Terpsichore; in the sphere of Mars, Bassarius, and Clio; in the sphere of the Sun, Trietericus, and Melpemene, in the sphere of Venus, Lysius, and Erato; in the sphere of Mercury, Silenus, and Euterpe; in the sphere of the Moon, Bacchus, Lyeus, and the Muse Thalia. Also in the spheres of the Elements, he names the souls after this manner. In the fire he puts the planet, and the morning; in the air lightening  Jupiter, and Juno; in water the Ocean, and Thetys; in the earth Pluto, and Proserpina; but the soul of the world or universe Magicians call the Jupiter of the world, and the mind of the world Apollo, and the nature of the world, Minerva. Besides in the fire they put Vulcan, in the water Neptune, and they did name them by divers names. Also in the Stars of the Zodiack the Pythagorians did put twelve particular Gods or souls placed in the hearts of those Stars, and thence governing the whole Star, viz in the heart of Aries is placed a particular Pallas, in the heart of Taurus a particular Venus, of Gemini a particular Phebus, of Cancer Mercury, of Leo Jupiter, of Virgi Ceres, of Libra Vulcan, of Scorpio Mars, of Sagittarius Diana, of Capricorn Vesta, of Aquarius a particular Juno, in the heart of Pisces a particular Neptune: This did Manilius sing forth in these verses.
And most ancient Orpheus writing to Museus, reckons up more Dieties of the heavens then these, signifying their names, respects, and duties, calling them all in proper songs. Let no one therefore think that they are the names of evill deceiving spirits; but of naturall, and divine vertues, distributed to the world by the true God, for the service, and profit of man, who knew how to use them: and antiquity it self hath ascribed to each of these Dieties the severall members of man; as the ear to memory, which Virgil also dedicates to Phebus, saying, Cynthius puls my ear, and admonisheth me. So the right hand being a token of fortitude, & by which an oath is made, Numa Pompilius, as saith Livy, hath dedicated to faith: The fingers are under the tuition of Minerva, and the knees given to Mercifullness; Hence they that beg pardon bend them. Some dedicate the Navell to Venus as the place of luxury; some who refer all the members to it as the center, say it is dedicated to Jupiter Hence in the Temple of Jupiter Hammon the effigies of a navel is celebrated. Many other things the ancients did observe, ascribing every little member and joynt to their Dieties, which if they be rightly understood, and the true Dieties ruling over them known, would not at all swerve from their duty, seeing also sacred writ testifies that all our members are governed by the superior vertues, of which we shall speak more largely in the following book; and not members only, but every exercise of men is distributed to its Dietie, as huntings to Diana, wars to Pallas, husbandry to Ceres, of which thus speaks Apollo in his Oracles in Porphyrie. Moreover they did call those governors of the world, (as Hermes calls them) Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, by many names, and epithites; viz calling Saturn Coelius, sithe-bearer, the father of the Gods, the Lord of the time, the high Lord, the great, the wise, the intelligent, ingenious revolutor, of a long space, an old man of great profundity, the author of secret contemplation, impressing, or depressing great thoughts in the hearts of men, destroying and preserving all things, overturning force and power, and constituting, a keeper of secret things, and a shewer of them, causing the loss, and finding of the author of life and death.
So Jupiter is called as it were a helping Father, the King of heaven, Magnanimous, thundering, lightning, unconquered, high and mighty, great and mighty, good, fortunate, sweet, mild, of good will, honest, pure, walking well, and in honour, the Lord of joy and of judgements, wise, true, the shewer of truth, the judge of all things, excelling all in goodness, the Lord of riches, and wisdome.
Mars is called Mavors, powerfull in war, bloody, powerfull in arms, a sword-bearer, magnanimous, bold, untamed, generous, lightning, of great power and furious hast, against whom none can defend himself if he resist him, who destroyes the strong, and powerfull, and deposeth Kings from their thrones, the Lord of heat and power, the Lord of fiery heat, and of the planet of blood; who inflames the hearts of contenders, and gives them boldness.
The Sun is called Phæbus, Diespiter, Apollo, Titan, Pean, Phanes, Horus, Osiris, as it is in that Oracle,
He is called also Arcitenens, burning fiery, golden flaming, radiating, of a fiery hair, of a golden hair, the eye of the world, Lucifer, seeing all things, ruling all things, the creator of light, the King of Stars, the great Lord, good, fortunate, honest, pure, prudent, intelligent, wise, shining over the whole world, governing, and vivifying all bodies that have a soul, the prince of the world keeping all the Stars under himself, the light of all the Stars, darkening, burning, overcoming their vertue by his approach, yet by his light and splendor giving light and splendor to all things: in the night he is called Dionysius, but in the day Apollo, as if driving away evill things. Therefore the Athenians called him Alexicacon, and Homer Vlion, i.e. the driver away of evil things. He is also called Phæbus from his beauty and brightness, and Vulcan from his fiery violence, because the force thereof consists of many fires. He is also called the Sun, because he contains the light of all the Stars: hence he is called by the Assyrians אַדַאד Adad, which signifies only, and by the Hebrews שֶׁמֶשׁ Schemesch, which signifies proper.
Venus is called the Lady, nourishing, beautifull, white, fair, pleasing, powerfull, the fruitfull Lady of love and beauty, the progeny of Ages, the first parent of men, who in the beginning of all things joyned diversity of sexes together with a growing love, and with an eternall off-spring propagates kinds of men and Animals, the queen of all delights, the Lady of rejoycing, friendly, sociable, pittifull, taking all things in good part, alwaies bountifull to mortals, affording the tender affection of a mother to the conditions of them in misery, the safegard of mankind, letting no moment of time pass without doing good, overcoming all things by her power, humbling the high to the low, the strong to the weak, the noble to the vile, rectifying, and equalling all things: and she is called Aphrodite, because in every sexe, she is found to be of every mind: and she is called Lucifera, i.e. bringing light, bringing the yeers of the Sun to light; and she is called Hesperus, when she follows the Sun, and Phosperus, because she leads through all things though never so hard.
Mercury is called the son of Jupiter, the cryer of the gods, the interpreter of gods, Stilbon, the Serpent-bearer, the rod-bearer, winged on his feet, eloquent, bringer of gain, wise, rationall robust, stout, powerfull in good and evil, the notary of the Sun, the messenger of Jupiter, the messenger betwixt the supernall and infernall gods, male with males, female with females, most fruitfull in both sexes; and Lucan cals him the Arbitrator of the gods. He is also called Hermes i.e. interpreter, bringing to light all obscurity, and opening those things which are most secret.
The Moon is called Phebe, Diana, Lucina, Proserpina, Hecate, Menstruous, of a half form, giving light in the night, wandring silent, having two horns, a preserver, a night-walker, horn-bearer, the queen of heaven, the chiefest of the Deities, the first of the heavenly gods and goddesses, the queen of spirits, the mistris  of all the Elements, whom the stars answer, seasons return, Elements serve; at whose nod lightnings breath forth, seeds bud, plants increase, the initiall parent of fruit, the sister of Phæbus, light, and shining, carrying light from one planet to another, enlightening all powers by its light, restraining the various passings of the Stars, dispensing various lights by the circuits of the Sun, the Lady of great beauty, the mistris of rain and waters, the giver of riches, the nurse of mankind, the governor of all States, kind, mercifull, protecting men by Sea and land, mitigating all tempests of fortune, dispensing with fate, nourishing all things growing on the earth, wandering into divers woods, restraining the rage of Goblins, shutting the openings of the earth, dispensing the light of the Heaven, the wholsome rivers of the Sea, and the deplored silence of the infernals, by its nods; ruling the world, treading hell under her feet; of whose majesty the birds hasting in the Aire are affraid, the wild beasts straggling in the mountains, Serpents lying hid in the ground, fishes swiming in the Sea;
But of these and the like names of Stars and planets, and their Epithites, Sirnames, and callings upon, he that will know more, and make more curious enquiry, must betake himself to the hymnes of Orpheus, which he that truely understands, hath attained to a great understanding of naturall Magick.
The Celestiall souls send forth their vertues to the Celestial bodies, which then transmit them to this sensible world. For the vertues of the terrene orb proceed from no other cause then Celestiall. Hence the Magician that will worke by them, useth a cunning invocation of the superiors, with mysterious words, and a certain kind of ingenious speech, drawing the one to the other, yet by a naturall force through a certain mutuall agreement betwixt them, whereby things follow of their own accord, or sometimes are drawn unwillingly. Hence saith Aristotle in the sixth book of his Mysticall Philosophy, that when any one by binding or bewitching doth call upon the Sun or other stars, praying them to be helpfull to the work desired, the Sun and other Stars do not heare his words, but are moved after a certain manner by a certain conjunction, and mutuall series, whereby the parts of the world are mutually subordinate the one to the other, and have a mutuall consent, by reason of their great union: As in mans body one member is moved by perceiving the motion of another, and in a harp one string is moved at the motion of another. So when any one moves any part of the world; other parts are moved by the perceiving the motion of that. The knowledge therefore of the dependency of things following one the other, is the foundation of all wonderfull operation, which is necessarily required to the exercising the power of attracting superior vertues. Now the words of men are certain naturall things, and because the parts of the world mutually draw one the other, therefore a Magician invocating by words, works by powers fitted to nature, by leading some by the love of one to the other, or drawing others by reason of the following of one after the other, or by repelling by reason of the enmity of one to the other, from the contrariety, and difference of things, and multitude of vertues; which although they are contrary, and different, yet perfect one part; sometimes also he compels things by way of authority, by the Celestiall vertue, because he is not a stranger to the heaven. A man therefore, if he receives the impression of any ligation, or fascination, doth not receive it according to the rationall soul, but sensuall, and if he suffers in any part, suffers according to the Animall part. For they cannot draw a knowing and intelligent man by reason, but by receiving that impression and force by sense, in as much as the Animal spirit of man is by the influence of the Celestials, and cooperation of the things of the world, affected beyond his former and naturall disposition. As the son moves the father to labor, although unwilling, for to keep and maintain him, although he be wearied; and the desire to rule is moved to anger and other labors, for to get the dominion. And the indigency of nature, and fear of poverty, moves a man to desire riches. And the ornaments, and beauty of women is an incitement to concupiscence. And the harmony of a wise Musitian  moves his hearers with various passions, whereof some do voluntary follow the consonancy of art, others conform themselves by gesture, although unwillingly, because their sense is captivated, their reason not being intent to these things. But these kinds of fascinations & ligations the vulgar doth neither admire, nor detest, by reason of their usualness: but they admire other naturall things, becaue they are ignorant of them, and are not accustomed to them. Hence they fall into errors, thinking those things to be above nature, or contrary to nature, which indeed are by nature, and according to nature. We must know therefore that every superior moves its next inferior, in its degree, and order, not only in bodies, but also in spirits. So the universall soul moves the particular soul; and the rational acts upon the sensual, and that upon the vegetable; and every part of the world acts upon another, and every part is apt to be moved by another; and every part of this inferior world suffers from the heavens according to their nature, and aptitude, as one part of the Animall body suffers from another. And the superior intellectuall world moves all things below it self, and after a manner contains all the same beings from the first to the last, which are in the inferior world. Celestiall bodyes therefore move the body of the elementary world, compounded, generable, sensible, from the circumference to the center, by superior, perpetual, and spirituall essences, depending on the primary intellect, which is the acting intellect; but upon the vertue put in by the word of God, which word the wise Chaldeans of Babylon call the cause of causes, because from it are produced all beings, the acting intellect which is the second from it depends; and that by reason of the union of this word with the first author, from whom all things being are truely produced; The word therefore is the Image of God, the acting intellect the image of the word, the soul is the image of this intellect; and our word is the image of the soul, by which it acts upon naturall things naturally, because nature is the work thereof. And every one of those perfects his subsequent, as a father his son, and none of the latter exists without the former. For they are depending amongst themselves, by a kind of ordinate dependency, so that when the latter is corrupted, it is returned into that which was next before it, untill it come to the heavens, then unto the universall soul, and lastly unto the acting intellect, by which all other creatures exist, and which it self exists in the principall author, which is the creating word of God, to which at length all things are returned. Our soul therefore, if it will work any wonderfull thing in these inferiors, must have respect to their beginning, that it may be strengthened, and illustrated by that, and receive power of acting through each degree from the very first author. Therefore we must be more diligent in contemplating the souls of the Stars then their bodies, and the supercelestiall, and intellectuall world, then the Celestial corporeall, because that is more noble, although this be excellent, and the way to that; and without which medium the influence of the superiour cannot be attained to. As for example, the Sun is the King of Stars, most full of light, but receives it from the intelligible world above all other Stars, because the soul thereof is more capable of intelligible splendor. Wherefore he that desires to attract the influence of the Sun, must contemplate upon the Sun, not only by the speculation of the exterior light, but also of the interior. And this no man can do unless he return to the soul of the Sun, and become like to it, and comprehend the intelligible light thereof with an intellectuall sight, as the sensible light with a corporeal eye. For this man shalbe filled with the light thereof; and the light thereof which is an under type impressed by the supernal Orb it receives into it self, with the illustration whereof his intellect being endowed, & truely like to it, & being assisted by it shall at length attain to that supreme brightness, and to all forms that partake thereof. And when he hath received the light of the supreme degree, then his soul shall come to perfection, and be made like to the spirits of the Sun, and shall attain to the vertues, and illustrations of the supernaturall vertue, and shall enjoy the power of them, if he hath obtained faith in the first author. In the first place therefore we must implore assistance from the first author, and praying not only with mouth but a Religious gesture and supplicant soul, also abundantly, uncessantly, and sincerely, that he would enlighten our mind, and remove darkness growing upon our souls by reason of our bodies.
Now it is time to turn our pen to higher matters, and to that part of Magick which teacheth us to know and perfectly understand the rules of Religion, and how we ought to obtain the truth by Divine Religion, and how rightly to prepare our mind and spirit, by which only we can comprehend the truth; for it is a common opinion of the Magicians, that unless the mind and spirit be in good case, the body cannot be in good health: But then a man to be truly sound when body and soul are so coupled, and agree together, that the firmness of the mind and spirit be not inferior to the powers of the body; But a firm and stout mind (saith Hermes) can we not otherwise obtain, than by integrity of life, by piety, and last of all, by Divine Religion: for holy Religion purgeth the mind, and maketh it Divine, it helpeth nature, and strengtheneth naturall powers, as a Physitian  helpeth the health of the body, and a Husbandman the strength of the earth. Whosoever therefore, Religion being laid aside, do consider only in naturall things, are wont very oft to be deceived by evill spirits; but from the knowledge of Religion, the contempt and cure of vices ariseth, and a safeguard against evil spirits; To conclude, nothing is more pleasant and acceptable to God than a man perfectly pious, and truly Religious, who so far excelleth other men, as he himself is distant from the Immortall gods. Therefore we ought, being first purged, to offer and commend our selves to divine piety and Religion; and then our senses being asleep, with a quiet mind to expect that Divine Ambrosian Nectar (Nectar I say, which Zachary the prophet calleth Wine making maids merry) praising and adoring that supercelestiiall Bacchus, the chiefest ruler of the gods and priests, the author of regeneration, whom the old poets sang was twice born, from whom rivers most Divine flow into our hearts.
Whosoever therefore thou art that now desireth to study thisd science, keep silence and constantly conceal within the secret closets of your Religious breast, so holy a determination; for (as Mercury saith) to publish to the knowledge of many a speech throughly filled with so great majesty of the Deity, is a sign of an irreligious spirit; and Divine Plato commanded, that holy and secret mysteries should not be divulged to the people; Pythagoras also and Porphyrius consecrated their followers to a Religious silence; Orpheus also, which a certain terrible authority of Religion did exact an oath of silence, and from those he did initiate to the Ceremonies of holy things: Whence in the verses concerning the holy word he sings,
Hence also in celebrating the holy mysteries of Ceres Eleusine, they only were admitted to be initiated, the cryer proclaiming the prophane vulgar to depart; and in Esdras we read this precept concerning the Cabalisticall secret of the Hebrews, declared in these verses, Thou shalt deliver those books to the wise men of the people, whose hearts thou knowest can comprehend them, and keep those secrets. Therefore the Religious volumes of the Egyptians & those belonging to the secrets of their ceremonies, were made of consecrated paper; in these they did write down leters  which might not easily be known, which they call holy. Macrobius Marcellinus and others say, they were called Hieroglyphics, least perchance the writings of this kind should be known to the prophane, which also Apuleius testifies in these words, saying, The sacrifice being ended, from a secret retyred closet he bringeth forth certain books noted with obscure letters, affording compendious words of the conceived speech, partly by the figures of beasts of this kind, partly by figures full of knots, and crooked in the manner of a wheel & set thick, twining about like vine tendrels, the reading thereby being defended from the curiosity of the prophane; Therefore we shall be worthy scholars of this science, if we be silent and hide those things which are secret in religion, for the promise of silence (as saith Tertullian) is due to Religion; but they which do otherwise are in very great danger, whence Apuleius saith concerning secrets of holy Writs; I would tell it you, if it were lawfull to tell it; you should know it; if it were lawfull to hear it; but both ears and tongue would contract the same guilt of rash curiosity. So we read Theodorus the tragick poet, when he would have referred somethings of the mysteries of the Jews Scripture to a certain fable, was deprived of sight. Theopompus also who began to translate somethings out of the Divine law into the Greek tongue, was presently troubled in mind and spirit, whence afterward earnestly desiring God, wherefore this had happened to him, received an answer in a dream, because he had basely polluted Divine things, by setting them forth in publike. One Numenius also being very curious of hidden things, incurred the displeasure of the Divine powers, because he interpreted the holy mysteries of the goddesse Eleusina and published them for he dreamed that the goddesses of Eleusis stood in a whores habit before the Brothell house, which when he wondred at, they wrathfully answered, that they were by him violently drawn from their modestly and prostituted everywhere to all commers, by which he was admonished, that the Ceremonies of the gods ought not to be divulged. Therefore it hath alwaies been the great care of the Ancients to wrap up the mysteries of God and nature, and hide them with diverse Aenigmaes, which law the Indians, Brachmans, Æthiopians, Persians, and Egyptians also observed; hence Mercurius, Orpheus, and all the ancient Poets and Philosophers, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato Aristoxenus, Ammonius, kept them inviolably. Hence Plotinus and Origenes and the other disciples of Ammonius (as Porphyry relates in his book of the education and Discipline of Plotinus) sware, never to set forth the Decrees of their master. And because Plotinus, brake his oath made to Ammonius, and published his mysteries, for the punishment of his transgression, he was consumed (as they say) by the Horrible disease of Lice. Crist also himself, while he lived on earth, spoke after that manner and fashion that only the more intimate disciples should understand the mystery of the word of God, but the other should perceive the parables only: commanding moreover that holy things should not be given to Dogs, nor pearles cast to Swine: Therefore the Prophet saith, I have hid thy words in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. Therefore it is not fit that those secrets which are amongst a few wise men, and communicated by mouth only, should be publikly written. Wherefor you will pardon me, If I pass over in silence many and the chiefest secret mysteries of Ceremonial Magick. I suppose I shal do enough, if I open those things which are necessary to be known, and you by the reading of this book go not away altogether empty of these mysteries; but on that condition let these things be communicated to you, on which Dionysius bound Timothy, that they which perceive these Secrets, would not expose them to the unworthy, but gather them together amongst wise men, and keep them with that reverence that is due to them. Furthermore I would also warne you in the beginning, that even as the divine powers detest publike things and profane, and love secrecy: So every Magical experiment fleeth the publike, seeks to be hid, is strengthened by silence, but is destroyed by publicationm neither doth any compleate effect follow after; all these things suffer losse, when they are poured into prating and incredulous minds; therefore it behoveth a Magicall operator, if he would get fruit from this art, to be secret, and to manifest to none, neither his work nor place, not time, neither his desire nor will, unless either to a master, or partner, or companion, who also ought to be faithfull, believing, silent, and dignified by nature and education: Seeing that even the prating of a companion, his incredulity and unworthiness hindreth and disturbeth the effect in every operation.
About the beginning of the first book of this work, we have spoken what manner of person a Magician ought to be; but now we will declare a msyticall and secret matter, necessary for every one who desireth to practize  this art, which is both the beginning, perfection and key of all Magicall operations, and it is the dignifying of men to this so sublime vertue and power; for this faculty requireth in man a wonderfull dignification, for that the understanding which is in us the highest faculty of the soul, is the only worker of wonders, which when it is overwhelmed by too much commerce with the flesh, and busied about the sensible soul of the body, is not worthy of the command of Divine substances; therefore many prosecute this art in vain; Therefore it is meet that we who endeavor to attain to so great a height should especially meditate of two things; first how we should leave carnall affections, fraile sense, and materiall passions. Secondly, by what way and means we may ascend to an intellect pure & conjoyned with the powers of the gods, without which we shall never happily ascend to the scrutiny of secret things, and to the power of wonderfull workings, or miracles; for in these dignification consists wholly, which, nature, desert, and a certain religious art do make up; naturall dignity is the best disposition of the body and its Organs, not obscuring the soul with any grossness, and being without al distemper, and this proceedeth from the situation, motion, light, and influence of the Celestiall bodies and spirits which are conversant in the generation of every one, as are those whose ninth house is fortunate by Saturn, Sol, and Mercury; Mars also in the ninth house commandeth the spirits; but concerning these things we have largely treated in the books of the Stars: But who so is not such a one, it is necessary that he recompense the defecr of nature by education, and the best ordering and prosperous use of natural things untill he become commpleat in all intrinsecall and extrinsecall perfections. Hence so great care is taken in the law of Moses concerning the priest, that he be not polluted by a dead carcase or by a woman a widow, or menstruous, that he be free from leprosie, flux of blood, burstness, and be perfect in all his members, not blind, nor lame, nor crook-backed, or with an illfavored nose. And Apuleius saith in his Apology, that the youth to be initiated to divination by magick spels, ought to be chosen, sound without sickness, ingenious, comely, perfect in his members, of a quick spirit, eloquent in speech, that in him the divine power might be conversant as in the good houses; That the mind of the youth having quickly attained experience, may be restored to its divinity. But the meritorious dignity is perfected by two things; namely learning and practice. The end of learning is to know the truth; it is meet therefore, as is spoken in the beginning of the first book, that he be learned and skilful in those three faculties; then all impediments being removed, wholly to apply his soul to contemplation & to convert it self into it self; for there is even in our own selves the apprehension and power of all things; but we are prohibited, so as that we little enjoy these things, by passions opposing us even from our birth, and vain imaginations and immoderate affections, which being expelled, the divine knowledge and power presently takes place; but the Religious operation obtains no ness efficacy which ofttimes of it self alone is sufficiently powerfull for us to obtain this deifying vertue, so great is the vertue of holy duties rightly exhibited and performed, that though they be not understood, yet piously and perfectly observed, and with a firm faith believed, they have no less efficacy then to adorn us with a divine power; But what dignity is acquired by the art of Religion, is perfected by certain Religious Ceremonies, expiations, consecrations, and holy rites, proceeding from him whose spirit the publike Religion hath consecrated, who hath power of imposition of hands, and of initiating with Sacramentall poer, by which the Character of the divine vertue and power os stampt on us which they call the divine consent, by which a man supported with the divine nature, and made as it were a companion of the Angels beareth the ingrafted power of God; & this rite is referred to the Ecclesiastical mysteries: If therefore now thou shalt be a man perfect in the sacred understanding of Religion, and piously and most constantly meditatest on it, and without doubting believest, and art such an one on whom the authority of holy rites and nature hath conferred dignity above others, amd one, whom the divine powers contemn not, thou shalt be able by praying, consecrating, sacrificeing, invocating, to attract spiritual and Celestial powers, and to imprint them on those things thou pleasest, and by it to vivifie every magicall work; But whosoever beyond the authority of his office, without the merit of Sanctity and Learning, beyond the dignity of nature and education, shall presume to work any thing in Magick, shall work in vain, and deceive both himself and those that believe on him, and with danger incur the displeasure of the Divine powers.
There are two things, which rule every operation of Ceremoniall Magick, namely Religion and Superstition. This Religion is a continuall contemplation of Divine things, and by good works an uniting one self with God and the Divine powers, by which in a reverent family, a service, and a sanctification of worship worthy of them is performed, and also the Ceremonies of Divine worship are rightly exercised; Religion therefore is a certain discipline of externall holy things and Ceremonies by the which as it were by certain signs we are admonished of internall and spirituall things, which is so deeply implanted in us by nature, that we more differ from other creatures by this then Rationality; whosoever therefore neglects Religion (as we have spoken before) and confides only in the strength of naturall things, are very often deceived by the evil spirits; therefore they who are more religiously and holily instructed, neither set a tree nor plant their vinyard, nor undertake any mean work without divine invocation, as the Doctor of the Nations commands the Colossians, saying, whatsoever you shall do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ giving thanks to him, and to God the Father by him. Therefore to superadde the powers of Religion to Physical and Mathematicall vertues is so far from a fault, that not to joyn them, is an hainous sin. Hence in libro senatorum saith Rabbi Hemina, he that enjoyeth any of the creatures without Divine benediction, is supposed both by God and the Church to have used it as taken by theft and robbery, of whom it is written by Salomon, he that takes away any things violently from father and mother, is a destroyer; But God is our father, and the Church our mother, as it is written, Is not he thy father who possesseth thee? and elsewhere, Hear my son the discipline of thy father, and despise not the law of thy mother; nothing more displeaseth God, then to be neglected and contemned; nothing pleaseth him more, then to be renowned and adored. Hence he hath permitted no creature of the world to be without Religion. All do worship God, play (as Proclus saith) frame hymnes  to the leaders of their order; but some things truly after a naturall, others after a sensible, othere a rationall, others an intellectuall manner, and all things in their manner, according to the song of the three children, bless the Lord: But the rites and Ceremonies of Religion, in respect of the diversity of times and places, are diverse. Every Religion hath something of good, because it is directed to God his creator; and although God allows the Christian Religion only, yet other worships which are undertaken for his sake, he doth not altogether reject, and leaveth them not unrewarded, if not with an eternal, yet with a temporal reward, or at least doth punish them less; but he hateth, thundreth against and utterly destroys prophane persons and altogether irreligious as his enemies; for their impoety is greater then he others who follow a false and erroneous Religion: For there is no Religion (saith Lactantius so erroneous, which hath not somewhat of wisdom in it, by which they may obtain pardon, who have kept the chiefest duty of man, if not indeed, yet in intention: But no man can of himself attain to the true Religion, unless he be taught it of God. All worship therefore, which is different from the true Religion, is superstition; In like manner also that which giveth Divine worship, either to whom it ought not, or in that manner which it ought not. Therefore we must especially take heed least at any time, by some perverse worship of superstition, we be envious to the Almighty God, and to the holy powers under him; for this would be not only wicked, but an act most unworthy of Philosophers; superstition therefore altogether it be far different from the true Religion, yet it is not all and wholly rejected, because in many things it is even tolerated, and observed by the chief rulers of Religion; But I call that superstition especially, which is a certain resemblance of Religion, which for as much as it imitates whatsoever is in Religion, as miracles, Sacraments, rites, observations and such like, from whence it gets no small power, and also obtains no less strength by the credulity of the operator; for how much a constant credulity can do, we have spoken in the first book, and is manifestly known to the vulgar. Therefore superstition requireth credulity, as Religion faith, seeing constant credulity can do so great things, as even to work miracles in opinions and false operations; whosoever therefore in his Religion, though false, yet beleeveth most strongly that it is true, and elevates his spirit by reason of this his credulity, untill it be assimilated to those spirits who are the chief leaders of that Religion, may work those things which nature and reason discern not; but incredulity and diffidence doth weaken every work not only in superstition, but also in true Religion, and enervates the desired effect even of the most strong experiments. But how superstition imitateth Religion, these examples declare; namely when worms and locusts are excommunicated, that they hurt not the fruits; when bels and Images are baptised and such like; but because the old Magicians and those who were the authors of this art amongst the ancients, have been Caldeans, Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians and Arabians, all whose Religion was perverse and polluted idolatry, we must very much take heed, least we should permit their errors to war against the grounds of the Catholick Religion; for this were blasphemous, and subject to the curse; and I also should be a blasphemer, if I should not admonish you of these thigs, in this science; wheresoever therefore you shall finde these things written by us, know that those things are only related out of other Authors, and not put down by us for truth, but for a probable conjecture which is allyed to truth and an Instruction for imitation in those things which are true; Therefore we ought from their Errors to collect the Truth, which work truly requireth a profound Understanding, perfect Piety, and painfull and laborious Diligence, and also Wisdom which knoweth out of every Evill to extract Good, and to fit oblique things unto the right use of those things which it governeth, as concerning this Augustine gives us an Example of a Carpenter to whom Oblique and Complicate things are no less necessary and convenient then the Straight.
There are three Guides which bring us even to the paths of truth and which rule all our Religion, in which it wholly consisteth, namely Love, Hope and Fayth: for Love is the chariot of the Soul, the most excellent of all things, descending from the Intelligences above even to the most inferior things It congregates and converts our mind into the Divine beauty, preserves us also in all our works, gives us Events according to our wishes, administreth power to our supplications: as we read in Homer, Apollo heard Chrysons prayers because he was his very great friend: and some read of Mary Magdalene in the Gospell, many sins were forgiven her, because she loved much; But hope immoveably hanging on those things it desireth, when it is certain and not wavering, nourisheth the mind and perfecteth it; But Faith the superior vertue of all not grounded on humane fictions, but Divine revelations wholly, peirceth  all things through the whole world, for seeing it descends from above from the first light, and remains neerest  to it, is far more noble and excellent than the arts, sciences and beliefes arising from inferior things: this being darted into our intellect by reflexion  from the first light. To conclude, by faith man is made somewhat the same with the superior powers and enjoyeth the same power with them: Hence Proclus saith. As belief which is a credulity, is below science: so belief which is a true faith, is supersubstantially above all science and understanding conjoyning us immediately to God; for Faith is the root of all miracles, by which alone (as the Platonists testifie) we approach to God, and obtain the Divine power and protection. So we read that Daniel escaped the mouths of the Lyons, because he believed on his God. So to the woman with the bloody issue saith Christ, thy Faith hath made thee whole; and of the blind man desiring sight, he required faith, saying, Do ye believe, that I can open your eyes? so Pallas in Homer comforteth Achilles with these words, I am come to pacifie your wrath, if you will believe. Therefore Linus the Poet sings all things are to be beleeved, because all things are easie  to God; nothing is impossible to him, therefore nothing incredible; therefore we believing those things which belong to Religion, do obtain the vertue of them; but when we shall faile in our Faith, we shall do nothing worthy admiration, but of punishment; As we have an example of this in Luke, in these words, Therefore certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call, over them which had evil spirits in the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth; and the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who art thou? and the man in whom the evil spirit was, lept  on them, and over came  them, so that they fled out of the house naked and wounded.
Therefore Our mind being pure and divine, inflamed with a religious love, adorned with hope, directed by faith, placed in the hight  and top of the humane soul, doth attract the truth, and sudainly comprehend it, & beholdeth all the stations, grounds, causes and sciences of things both natural and immortal in the divine truth it self as it were in a certain glass of Eternity. Hence it comes to pass that we, though Natural, know those things which are above nature, and understand all things below, and as it were by divine Oracles receive the knowledg  not only of those things which are, but also of those that are past and to come, presently, and many years hence; Moreover not only in Sciences, Arts and Oracles the Understanding challengeth to it self this divine vertue, but also receiveth this miraculous power in certain things by command to be changed. Hence it comes to pass that though we are framed a natural body, yet we sometimes prædominate  over nature, and cause such wonderfull, sodain and difficult operations, as that evil spirits obey us, the stars are disordered, the heavenly powers compelled, the Elements made obedient; so devout men and those elevated by these Theologicall vertues, command the Elements, drive away Fogs, raise the winds, cause rain, cure diseases, raise the dead, all which things to have been done amongst diverse Nations, Poets and Historians do sing and relate: and that these things may be done, all the famousest Philosophers, and Theologians do confirme; so the prophets, Apostles, and the rest, were famous by the wonderfull power of God; therefore we must know, that as by the influx of the first agent, is produced oftentimes something without the cooperation of the middle causes, so also by the work of Religion alone, may something be done without the application of naturall and Celestiall vertues; but no man can work by pure Religion alone, unless he be made totally intellectuall: But whosoever, without the mixture of other powers, worketh by Religion alone, if he shall persevere long in the work, is swallowed up by the Divine power and cannot live long: But whosoever shall attempt this and not be purified, doth bring upon himself judgement, and is delivered to the evil spirit, to be devoured.
Seeing that the being and operation of all things, depend on the most high God, Creator of all things, from thence also on the other dlvine powers, to whom also is granted a power of fashioning and creating, not principally indeed, but instrumentally by vertue of the first Creator (for the beginning of every thing is the first cause, but what is produced by the second causes, is much more produced by the first, which is the producer of the second causes: which therefore we call secondary gods) It is necessary therefore that every Magitian  know that very God, which is the first cause, and Creator of all things; And also the other gods, or divine powers (which we call the second causes) and not to be ignorant, with what adoration, reverence, holy rites conformable to the condition of every one, they are to be worshipped: Whosoever therefore invocates the gods, and doth not confer on them their due honour, nor, rightly distribute to them what belongs to them, shall neither enjoy their presence, nor any successfull effect from them. As in Harmony, if one string be broken, the whole musick jars, and sometimes incurs the hazard of punishment, as it is written of the Assyrians, whom Salmanasar planted in Samaria, because they knew not the customes of the God of the Land, the Lord did send Lyons amongst them, who slew them, because they were ignorant of the rights of the god of the Land. Now therefore let us see, what the old Magicians and Philosophers thought concerning God; for we read that Nicocreonte, a tyrant of Cyprus, long since asking, who was the greatest God, the Serapian Oracle answered him, That he was to be accounted the greatest God, whose head was the Heavens, the Seas his Belly, the Earth his feet, his ears placed in the sky, his eyes the light of the glorious Sun; not much unlike to this, Orpheus sang in these verses,
Therefore they thought the whole world to be Jupiter, and truly he hath produced the soul of this world, which containeth the world in it self. Hence Sophocles saith, in truth there is but one onely God, who hath made this heaven and this spacious earth; and Euripides saith, Behold the most high, who every where embraceth in his Arms, the immensurable heaven and earth; believe that he is Jupiter, account him God; and Ennius the Poet sings,
He himself is the beginning, middle and end, as the ancient Prophets have taught us, to whom God long since delivered these things in two tables; and he calleth him in the same verse the only great Creator, and immortall. Zoroastes  likewise in his sacred History of the Persians defineth God thus, God is the first of all those things which suffer neither decay nor corruption, unbegot, never dying, without parts, and most like himself, The author and promoter of all good things, the father of all, most bountifull and wise, the sacred light of justice, the absolute perfection of nature, the contriver, and wisedom  thereof. Apuleius also describs  him to be a King, the cause, foundation and original, beginning of all nature, the supreme begetter of spirits, eternal, the preserver of living creatures, a Father with propagation, not to be comprehended by time, place or any other circumstance, and therefore imaginable to a few, utterable to none; from hence therefore Euripides commanded the highest God to be cald Jupiter, through whose head Orpheus sang all things came into this light, but the other powers he supposeth to be subservient, viz which are without God, and separated from him, and are by the Philosophers called the Ministers or Angels of God, and separated intelligences; therefore they say Religious worship to be due to this most high Jupiter and to him only, but to the other Divine powers not to be due unless for his sake.
Austine  and Porphyry testifie, that the Platonists held three persons in God, the first of which, they call the father of the world; the second they call the Son and the first mind, and so he is named by Macrobius. The third, the spirit or soul of the world, which Virgil also from Platos opinion calleth a spirit, when he sings,
Plotinus and Philo deliver, that the Son of God, viz the first mind or Divine intellect floweth from God the Father, even as a word from the speaker or as light from light; from hence it is that he is called both the word and speech, and splendour of God the Father; for the Divine mind by it self, with one only and uninterrupted act understandeth the chiefest good without any vicissitude, or mediate knowledge; he generateth in himself an Issue and Son, who is the full Intelligence, compleat image of himself, and the perfect pattern of the world, whom our John and Mercurius name the word or speech; Plato the Son of God the Father; Orpheus, Pallas born from Jupiters brain, that is, wisdom: This is the most absolute image of God the Father, yet by a certain relation, or some intrinsecall absolute thing, as it were begot and distinguished from the Father, who saith in Ecclesiasticus, I have proceeded from the mouth of the most high, I am the first begot before all creatures: Iamblichus testifieth this Son to be One and the same God with the Father in Essence, namely calling God, both the Father and Son of himself. Also Mercurius Trismegistus in Asclepius mentioneth the Son of God in diverse places; for he saith my God and Father begat a Mind a work diverss from himself; And elsewhere, unity begets unity, and reflecteth his flagrant love on himself; and in Pimander (where he seemeth to prophesie of the Covenant of grace to come, and of the mystery of regeneration) saith, the author of Regeneration is the Son of God, the man by the will of the one only God, and also that God is most replenished with the fruitfulness of both sexes. In like manner the Indian philosophers affirm, the World to be an Animal, partly Masculine, and partly Feminine; and Orpheus also calleth Nature or the Jove of this world, both the male and female thereof, and that the gods partake of both Sexes. Hence it is, that in his Hymnes he thus salutes Minerva, You are indeed both man and woman; and Apuleius in his book of the world, out of the Divinity of Orpheus produceth this verse of Jupiter,
And it is reported that the people of Cacenia wonderfully adored the God Moon. From this compleat intelligence of supream fecundity his love is produced, binding the intelligence with the mind. And by so much the more, by how much it is infinitely more intimate to it self, than other off springs to their parents. This is the third person, viz the holy spirit. Iamblichus also brings the oracles of the Chaldeans placing a fatherly power in God, and an Emanation of the intellect from the Father, and a fiery love proceeding from Father and Son, and the same to be God. Hence we read in Plutarch, that the Gentiles described God to be an intellectuall and fiery spirit, having no form, but transformilig himself into whatsoever he pleaseth, equalizing himself to all things; and we read in Deuteronomy, Our God is a consuming fire; of whom also Zoroastes  saith, all things were begot of fire alone; so also Heraclitus the Ephesian teacheth; Hence Divine Plato hath placed Gods habitation in fire, namely understanding, the unspeakable splendour of God in himself, and love about himself; and we read in Homer, The Heavens to be the Kingdom of Jupiter, when he sings,
But Aether is derived according to the Greek Grammer, from Aetho, which signifies to Burn, and Aer spiritus quasi Aethaer, that is, a burning spirit; And therefore Orpheus calleth the Heaven Pyripnon, that is a fiery breathing place; therefore the Father, Son, and the aimable spirit, which is also fiery, are by the Divines called three Persons; Whom Orpheus also in his adjurations invocateth with these words, Heaven I admire thee, thou wise work of the great God; I adjure thee, O thou word of the Father, which he first spake when he established the whole world by his wisdom. Hesiode  also confesseth the same things under the names of Jupiter Minerva and Bule in his Theogony, declaring the twofold birth of Jupiter in these words: The first daughter called Tritonia with gray eyes, having equal power with the Father, and prudent Bule, that is counsel, which Orpheus in the forenamed verses pronounceth plurally, because of his twofold Emanation, for he proceedeth both from Jupiter and Minerva. And Austin  himself in his fourth Book De Civit Dei doth testify that Porphyry the Platonist placed three Persons in God; the first he cals the father of the universe, the second, the first mind, and Macrobius the Son, the third the soul of the world, which Virgil according to Platos opinion, calleth a spirit, saying, the spirit within maintains. Therefore it is God, as Paul saith, from whom, in whom, by whom are all things: for from the father as from a fountain flow all things, but in the Son as in a pool all things are placed in their Ideas, and by the Holy Ghost are all things manifested, and every thing distributed to his proper degrees.
The Catholik  Doctors and faithfull people of God, have decreed, that we ought thus to believe and profess that there is one only true God, increate, infinite, omnipotent, eternal Father, Son and Holy Ghost, three persons, coeternall and coequall, of one most simple Essence, substance and nature. This is the Catholike faith, this is the Orthodox Religion, this is the Christian truth, that we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance. The Father begat the Son from all eternity and gave him his substance, and nevertheless retained it himself. The Son also by being begot, received the substance of the Father, but assumed not the proper Person of the Father; for the Father translated it not into the Son; for they are both of one and the same substance, but of diverse persons. This Son also although he be coeternall with the Father, and begot of the substance of the Father before the world, yet notwithstanding was born into the world out of the substance of a Virgin, and his name was called Jesus, perfect God, perfect man, of a reasonable soul and humane flesh, who in all things was man, sin excepted. Therefore it is necessary, that we beleeve, that our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, is God and man, one person, two natures; God begot before the world without a mother, man born into the world; without a father, from a pure Virgin, both before and after his birth; he suffered on the Cross, and dyed, but on the Cross restored life, and destroyed death by his death; he was buried and descended into hell, but brought forth the souls of the Fathers from hell, and rose again by his own power; the third day he ascended into the Heavens, & sent his spirit the Comforter, & shall come to Judge the quick  and the dead; and at his coming all men shall rise again in their flesh, and shall give an account of their works; this is the true faith, concerning which if any man doubt, and not firmly believe, he is far from the hope of eternall life and salvation.
God himself, though he be Trinity in persons, yet is but one only simple Essence; notwithstanding we doubt not but that there are in him many Divine powers, which as beams flow from him, which the Philosophers of the Gentiles cal gods, the Hebrew masters numerations, we name Attributes; as wisdom which Orpheus call Pallas; understanding, which he Mercury; The conception of the Form, which he Saturn; The Productive power, which he Neptune; the secret nature of things, which he Iuno; Love, which he Venus; pure life, which he the Sun, or Apollo. The matter of the whole world, he calleth Pan; the soul, as it ingendereth things below, contemplateth things above, and retracteth it self into it self, he honoured with three names, viz Maris, Neptune and Ocean, and more of this kind, of which he sings elsewhere,
Therefore the most prudent Theologians of the Gentiles did worship the One God, under diverse names and powers, yea diverse sexes; whom, as Pliny saith, Fraile and weak mortality hath digested unto more, being mindfull of his one frailty, that every man might worship that portion which he especially wanteth; so those who had need of faith invocated Jupiter; they that wanted providence, Apollo; wisdom, Minerva; and so as they wanted other things, they invocated other powers. Hence arose that great variety of Dieties, by reason of the many and diverse distribution of graces; but God is one, from whom all things. Therefore Apuleius in his book De mundo to Faustin saith, Whereas there is but one God and one power, yet he is named by diverse names, for the multitude of species, by whose variety he is made of many shapes; and Marcus Varro in his book of the worship of God, saith, As all souls are reduced to the one soul of the world or universe, so are all the gods referred to Jupiter, who is the same God, worshipped under diverse names. Therefore it is meet to know the sensible proprieties, and perfectly to intellectualize them by the way of more secret Analogy; whosoever understandeth truly the Hymnes of Orpheus and the old Magicians, shall find that they differ not from the Cabalisticall secrets and Orthodox traditions; for whom Orpheus cals Curets and unpolluted gods, Dionysius names Powers; the Cabalists appropriate them to the numeration Pahad, that is to the Divine fear: so that which is EnSoph in the Cabala, Orpheus calleth Might; and Typhon is the same with Orpheus, as Zamael in the Cabala; but the Mecubales of the Hebrews, the most learned in Divine things, have received the ten principal names of God, as certain Divine powers, or as it were members of God, which by ten numerations which they call Sephiroth as it were vestiments, Instruments or examplars of the Archetype, have an influence on all things created, through the high things, even to the lowest, yet by a certain order; for first and immediately they have influence on the nine orders of Angels, and quire of blessed souls, and by them into the Celestiall Spheres, Planets and men, by the which Sephiroth every thing then receiveth power and vertue; The first of these is the name Eheia, the name of the Divine Essence; his numeration is called Cether, which is interpreted a Crown or Diadem, and signifieth the most simple Essence of the Divinity, and it is called that which the eye seeth not, and is attributed to God the Father, and hath his influence by the order of Seraphinus, or as the Hebrews call them Haioth Hacadosch, that is creatures of holiness, and then by the primum mobile, bestows the gift of being to all things, filling the whole Universe both through the circumference and center, whose particular intelligence is called Meratiron, that is, the prince of faces, whose duty it is to bring others to the face of the prince; and by him the Lord spake to Moses. The second name is Iod or Tetragrammaton joyned with Iod; his numeration is Hochma, that is wisdom, and signifieth the Divinity full of Ideas, and the first begotten; and is attributed to the Son, and hath his influence by the order of Cherubins, or that the Hebrews call Orphanim, that is, forms or wheels; and from thence into the starry Heaven, where he fabricateth so many figures as he hath Ideas in himself, and distinguisheth the very Chaos of the creatures, by a particular Intelligence called Raziell, who was the ruler of Adam. The third name is called Tetragrammaton Elohim; his numeration is named Prina,  viz providence and understanding, and signifies remission, quietness, the Jubilee, penitentiall conversion, a great Trumpet, redemption of the world, and the life of the world to come; it is attributed to the Holy Spirit, and hath his influence by the order of the thrones, or which the Hebrews call Aralim, that is great Angels mighty and strong, and from thence by the sphere of Saturn administereth form to the unsettled matter, whose particular intelligence is Zaphchiel, the ruler of Noah, and another intelligence named Iophiel the ruler of Sem; and these are three supream and highest numerations as it were seats of the Divine persons, by whose commands all things are made, but are executed by the other seven, which are therefore called the numerations framing. Therefore the fourth name is El whose numeration is Hesed, which is Clemence or goodness, and signifieth grace, mercy, piety, magnificence, the scepter and right hand, and hath his influx by the order of the Dominations, which the Hebrews call Hasmalim, and so through the sphere of Iupiter  fashioning the Images of bodyes, bestowing clemency and pacifying justice on all; his particular intelligence is Zadkiell the ruler of Abraham: The fifth name is Elohim Gibor, that is, the mighty God, punishing the sins of the wicked; and his numeration is called Geburach, which is to say, power, gravity, fortitude, security, judgement, punishing by slaughter and war: and it is applyed  to the Tribunall of God, The girdle, the sword and left hand of God; it is also called Pachad, which is fear, and hath his influence throw  the order of powers which the Hebrews call Seraphim, and from thence through the sphere of Mars, to whom belongs fortitude, war, affliction, it draweth forth the Elements; and his particular intelligence is Camael, the ruler of Samson; The sixt  name is Eloha, or a name of four letters, joyned  with Vaudahat, his numeration is Tiphereth, that is apparel, beauty, glory, pleasure, and signifieth the tree of life, and hath his influence through the order of vertues, which the Hebrews call Malachim, that is Angels into the spere  of the Sun, giving brightness and life to it, and from thence producing mettals; his particular intelligence is Raphael, who was the Ruler of Isaac and Toby the younger, and the Angel Peliel, ruler of Iacob. The seventh name is Tetragrammaton Sabaoth, or Adonai Sabaoth, that is the God of hosts; and his numeration is Nezah, that is triumph and victory; the right Columne is applyed to it, and it signifies the eternity and justice of a revenging God; it hath his influence through the order of principalities, whom the Hebrews call Elohim, that is Gods, into the sphere of Venus, gives zeal and love of righteousness, and produceth vegetables; his Intelligence is Haniel and the Angel Cerviel, the ruler of David; The eighth is called also Elohim Sabaoth, which is also interpreted the God of Hoasts, not of war and justice, but of piety and agreement; for this name signifieth both, and precedeth his Army; the numeration of this is called Hod, which is interpreted both praise, confession, honor and famousness. The left column is attributed to it; it hath his influence through the order of the Archangels, which the Hebrews call Ben Elohim, that is the sons of God, into the sphere of Mercury, and gives elegancy and consonancy of speech and produceth living creatures; his intelligence is Michael, who was the ruler of Salomon; The ninth name is called Sadai, that is Omnipotent, satisfying all, and Elhai, which is the living God; his numeration is Iesod, that is foundation, and signifieth a good understanding, a Covenant, redemption and rest, and hath his influence through the order of Angels, whom the Hebrews name Cherubim, into the sphere of the Moon, causing the increase and decrease of all things, and taketh care of the genui, and keepers of men, and distributeth them; his intelligence is Gabriel, who was the keeper of Joseph, Joshua and Daniel; The tenth name is Adonai Melech, that is Lord and King; his numeration is Malchuth, that is Kingdom and Empire, & signifieth a Church, Temple of God, and a Gate, and hath his influence through the order of Animastick, viz of blessed souls, which by the Hebrews is called Issim, that is Nobles, Lords and Princes; they are inferior to the Hierarchies, and have their influence on the sons of men, and give knowledge and the wonderfull understanding of things, also industry and prophesie; and the soul of Messiah is president amongst them, or (as others say) the intelligence Metattron  which is called the first Creature, or the soul of the world, and was the ruler of Moses.
Which the Ancient Doctors of the Hebrews have especially observed, who were wont to do many wonderfull things by words; the Pythagorians  also have shewed, how to cure very wonderfully the diseases both of body and mind, with certain words; we read also, that Orpheus, being one of the Argonauts diverted a most fierce storm by certain words; in like manner that Apollonius, by certain words whispered, raised up a dead maide at Rome; and Philostratus reporteth that some did by certain words call up Achilles Ghost; and Pausanias relates, that in Lydia in the Cities of Hiero-Cesarea and Hypepis, were two temples consecrated to the Goddess whom they called Persica, in both of which when divine service was ended, a certain Magitian, after he had laid dry wood upon the Altar, and in his native language had sang Hymnes, and pronounced certain barbarous words, out of a book which he held in his hand, presently the dry wood, no fire being put to it, was seen to be kindled, and burn most clearly. Also Serenus Samonicus delivereth amongst the precepts of Physick, that if this name Abracadabra be written, as is here expressed, viz diminishing letter after letter backward, from the last to the first, it will cure the Hemitritean Fever or any other, if the sheet of paper or parchment be hanged about the neck, and the disease will by little and little decline and pass away.
Neither let any distrust or wonder, that sacred words, applyed outwardly can do very much, seeing by them the Almighty God made the heavens and the earth; and further, by experience it is found, as saith Rab Costa Ben Luca, that many things not having Physicall vertues do very much, As for example, the finger of an abortive child hanged on the neck of a woman hindereth conception, so long as it remaineth there; Moreover that in diverse sacred words and names of God, there is great and Divine power, which worketh miracles, Zoroastes, Orpheus, Iamblicus, Synesius. Alchindus, and all the famous Philosophers testifie; and Artephius both a Magician and Philosopher, hath written a peculiar book concerning the vertue of words and Characters. Origen not inferior to the famousest Philosophers, doth maintain against Celsus, that there doth ly  hid wonderfull vertue in certain Divine names, and in the book of Judges the Lord saith, "my name which is Pele פֶלֶא", signifieth with us, a worker of miracles. or causing wonders; but the true name of God is known neither to men nor to Angels, but to God alone, neither shall it be manifested (as the holy Scriptures testifie) before the Will of God be fulfilled; Notwithstanding God hath other names amongst the Angels, others amongst us men; for there is no name of God amongst us (as Moses the Egyptian saith) which is not taken from his works, and signifieth with participation, besides the name Tetragrammaton, which is holy, signifying the substance of the Creator in a pure signification, in which no other thing is partaker with God the Creator; therefore it is called the separated name, which is written and not read, neither is it expressed by us, but named, and signifieth the second supernall Idiome, which is of God, and perhaps of Angels. In like manner the Angels have their name amongst themselves, and in their Idiome, which Paul calleth the tongue of Angels, concerning which we have very little knowledge with us, but all their other names are taken from their offices and operations, which have not so great efficacy, and therefore the Magicians call them by their true names, namely the heavenly ones, which are contained in the holy Bible.
The most high Creator and first cause, although he ruleth and disposeth all things, yet distributeth the care of execution to diverse Ministers, both good and bad, which John in the Revelations cals assisting, and destroying Angels: of which the prophet sings elsewhere; The Angel of the Lord remains in the presence of them that fear him, that he may preserve them: and elsewhere he describes immissions by evill Angels. Now whatsoever God doth by Angels, as by ministers, the same doth he by heavens, Stars, but as it were by instruments, that after this manner all things might work together to serve him, that as every part of Heaven, and every Star doth discern every corner or place of the earth, and time, species and Individuall: so it is fit that the Angelical vertue of that part and Star should be applyed to them, viz place, time, and species. Whence Austin  in his book of questions, saith, Every visible thing in this world, hath an Angelicall power appointed for it: Hence Origen on the book of Numbers saith, the world hath need of Angels, that may rule the Armies of the earth, Kingdoms, provinces, men, beasts, the nativity, and progress of living creatures, shrubs, plants, and other things, giving them that vertue which is said to be in them, from an occult propriety; much more need is there of Angels that may rule holy works, vertues and men, as they who alwaies see the face of the most high father, and can guide men in the right path, and also even the least thing to this place, as fit members of this world in which God as the chief president, dwelleth, most sweetly disposing all things, not being contained, or circumscribed, but containing all things, as John in the Revelations describeth the heavenly City, whose twelve gates are guarded with twelve Angels, infusing on them what they receive from the Divine name, twelve times revolved; and in the foundations of that City the names of the twelve Apostles, and the Lamb; for as in the Law, in the stones of the Ephod and foundations of the Holy City described by Ezekiel, were written the names of the tribes of Israel, and the name of four letters did predominate over them; so in the Gospel, the names of the Apostles are written in the stones of the foundation of the heavenly City, which stones stand for the tribes of Israel in the Church, over which the name of the Lamb hath influence, that is, the name of Jesus, in which is all the vertue of the four lettered name; seeing that Jehovah the Father hath given him all things: Therefore the Heavens receive from the Angels, that which they dart down; but the Angels from the great name of God and Jesu, the vertue whereof is first in God, afterward diffused into these twelve and seven Angels, by whom it is extended into the twelve signs, and into the seven planets, and consequently into all the other Ministers and instruments of God, pourtraiting even infinitely. Hence Christ saith, Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, he will give you; nd after his resurrection saith, In my name they shall cast out devils, and do as followeth; so that the name of four letters is no further necessary, the whole vertue thereof being translated into the name of Jesus, in which only miracles are done; neither is there any other (as Peter saith) under heaven given unto men, by which they can be saved, but that; but let us not think, that by naming Jesus prophanely, as the name of a certain man, we can do miracles by vertue of it: but we must invocate it in the holy Spirit, with a pure mind and a fervent spirit, that we may obtain those things which are promised us in him; especially knowledge going before, without which there is no hearing of us, according to that of the Prophet, I will hear him because he hath known my name; Hence at this time no favour can be drawn from the heavens, unless the authority, favor and consent of the name Jesu intervene; Hence the Hebrews and Cabalists most skilfull  in the Divine names, can work nothing after Christ by those old names, as their fathers have done long since; and now it is by experience confirmed, that no devil nor power of Hell, which vex and trouble men, can resist this name, but will they, nill they, bow the knee and obey, when the name Jesu by a due pronunciation is proposed to them to be worshipped, and they fear not only the name but also the Cross, the seal thereof; and not only the knees of earthly, heavenly, and hellish creatures are bowed, but also Insensible things do reverence it, and all tremble at his beck, when from a faithfull heart and a true mouth the name Jesus is pronounced, and pure hands imprint the salutiferous sign of the Cross: neither truly doth Christ say in vain to his Disciples, In my name they shall cast out Devils, &c. unless there were a certain vertue expressed in that name over divels  and sick folk, serpents, and persons, and tongues, and so forth, seeing the power which this name hath, is both from the vertue of God the institutor, and also from the vertue of him who is expressed by this name, and from a power implanted in the very word. Hence is it that seeing every creature feareth and reverenceth the name of him who hath made it, sometimes even wicked and ungodly men, if so be they believe the invocation of Divine names of this kind, do bind devils, and operate certain other great things.
We read in diverse places of the holy Scripture, of diverse members of God, and ornaments; but by the members of God, are understood manifold powers, most simply abiding in God himself, distinguished amongst themselves by the sacred names of God; but the garments of God and Ornaments, are as it were certain wayes and relations, or Emanations, or conduit pipes, by the which he diffuseth himself; the hemmes of which as oft as our mind shall touch, so often the Divine power of some member goeth forth, even as Jesus cryed  out, concerning the woman with the bloody Issue, Some body hath touched me, for I perceive vertue to go forth from me. These members therefore in God are like to ours; but the Ideas and exemplars of our members, to the which if we rightly conform our members, then being translated into the same Image, we are made the true sons of God, and like to God, doing and working the works of God: therefore concerning the members of God, many things are drawn forth out of the Scriptures; for we read of his head in the Canticles; Thy head as Carmel, and the locks of thy head as the purple of a King; but this Carmel signifieth not the mountain in the Sea coast of Syria, but a little creature, which ingendreth  the purple. Also of his eyes, eyelids and ears, we read in the Psalmes, the eyes of the Lord on the Just, and his ears to their prayers, his eyes look towards the poor, and his eyelids enquire  after the sons of men: also of his mouth, tast, throat, lips, and teeth, we read in Esay, Thou hast not enquired at my mouth; and in the Canticles, Thy throat as the best wine for my beloved, that goeth down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak; there are also Nostrils, by the which (as we often find in the Law) he smelleth the sacrifices for a sweet odour: he hath shoulders, armes, hands, and fingers, of the which we read in Esay; the government is laid upon his shoulders; to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? and the Kingly Prophet singeth, thy hands O Lord have made me and fashioned me, and I will behold the heavens, the work of thy fingers; he hath also a right and left hand; hence the Psalmist saith, The Lord saith to my Lord, sit at my right hand: and of the left we read, in the Gospel, on which the damned shall be placed at the last day: further we read of the heart, breast, back, and back parts of God; as in the book of Kings, that God found David a man according to his own heart; we read also in the Gospel his breast upon which the Disciple sleeping conceived divine mysteries; and the Psalmist describeth his back, in the paleness of gold; and he himself saith in Jeremiah, I will shew my back and not my face in the day of their perdition, and he saith to Moses, Thou shalt see my back parts; of his feet the Psalmist also saith, Darkness under his feet, and in Genesis he is said to walk to the South. In like manner also we read of the garments, and ornaments of God, as with the Psalmist, the Lord hath reigned, he hath put on beauty, cloathed  with light as with a garment; and elsewhere, Thou hast put on comliness and beauty; The Abysse as a garment and his cloathing; and in Ezekiel, the Lord speaketh, saying, I spread my garment over thee and covered thy nakedness; moreover also we read of the rod, Staffe, Sword and Buckler of God, as in the Psalmist, Thy rod and thy staffe, they have comforted me; his truth hath compassed thee about as with a shield; and in Deuteronomy we read of the sword of his glory; and very many of this sort the sacred word declares to us; from which members and Divine ornaments, there is no doubt, but that our memhers and all things about us, and all our works, are both ruled, directed, preserved, governed, and also censured, as the prophet saith, He hath put my foot upon a rock, and directed my goings; and elsewhere he saith, Blessed be the Lord my God, who teacheth my hand to war, and my fingers to fight; and of his mouth he saith, the Lord hath put a new song into my mouth; and elsewhere our Saviour saith, I will give you a mouth and wisdom; and of the hair he saith, an hair of your head shall not perish; and in another place, the hairs of your head are numbred; for the Almighty God seeing he would have us to be his Images and like to himself, hath framed members, limbs, and figures after many ways laid open in us, according to the similitude of his hidden vertues, as it were signs keeping the same order and proportion to them: whence the Mecubals of the Hebrews say, that if a man capable of the Divine influence do make any member of his body clean and free from filthiness, then it becometh Habitale and proper seat of the secret limb of God, and of the vertue to the which the same name is ascribed: so that if that member want any thing, the name being invocated, whence it dependeth, it is presently heard effectually, according to that, I will hear him, because he hath known my name; and these are the great and hidden mysteries, concerning which it is not lawfull to publish more.
The Philosophers have maintained, as we have shewed before, that the Heavens and Stars are Divine Animals, and their souls intellectuall, participating of the Divine mind; and they averre, that some separated substances are superior, others inferior to them, as it were governing and serving, which they call intelligences and Angels; moreover Plato himself affirmed, that Celestiall souls are not confined to their bodies, as our souls to our bodies, but to be, where they will, and also that they rejoyce  in the vision of God, and without any labor or pains do rule and move their bodies, and together in moving them do easily govern these inferior things; therefore they often called the souls of this kind, Gods, and appointed Divine honors for them, and dedicated prayers and sacrifices to them, and did worship them with Divine worship, and these are the gods to the which all people are attributed, concerning which Moses commanded in Deuteronomy, saying, least perchance your eyes being lifted up to Heaven, thou shouldest see the Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars of Heaven, and being turned back shouldest adore and worship them, to which all the Nations are subjected, which are under the Heaven; but the Lord Jehovah hath taken and brought you forth from the furnace of Egypt, that thou shouldest be an Hereditary people to himself; and in the same book chap.  he calleth the Sun, Moon, & Stars Gods; and the Doctors of the Hebrews upon that place of Genesis where it is said, that Abraham gave gifts to the sons of the concubines, viz Shemoth, Steltoma, that is strange names, but left Isaac heir of all that he possessed, say, that the sons of the concubines were not in the blessing of Abraham, given to Jehovah the most high creator, but to strange gods and deities, but that Isaac and his seed were given to the omnipotent Jehovah, and in no part to any strange Deities; therefore they are upbraided in Deuteronomy, because they served strange gods and worshipped them they knew not, and to whom they were not given; and also Joshua Nave, after that the people were brought into the land of promise, their enemies overcome, and the lots of the possessions of Israel distributed, gave the people leave to choose that God whom they would worship, saying, leave is given you this day to choose whom you will especially serve, whether the gods which your fathers served in Mesopotamia, or the gods of the Amorites, whose land you inhabite; but the people answered, we will serve the Lord Jehovah, and he shall be our God; Joshua said to them, ye cannot do it, for the Lord Jehovah is holy, strong, and jealous; but the people persevering to serve Jehovah; he saith to them, ye are witnesses your selves, that ye have chosen for your selves the Lord, to serve him; take away therefore strange gods out of the midst of you, and incline your hearts to the Lord God of Israel and he erected a great stone saying, this stone shalbe for a witness, least perhaps afterwards ye will deny and lye  to the Lord your God; therefore the other gods, to which the other Nations were given, were the Sun, Moon, twelve Signs, and other Celestial bodies, and Divine fabricks, yet not as they were bodies, but as the soul adhereth to them, and the whole Militia of Heaven, which Jeremy cals the queen of Heaven, that is the power by which the Heaven is governed, viz the soul of the world, of which Jeremy saith, The sons gather sticks, and part thereof maketh a fire, and the women mingle oyl, that they might make a cake for the Queen of heaven, neither was the worship of Doulia, to this Queen and other Celestiall souls prohibited them, but of Latria only, which they that gave, are reproved of the Lord; but the name of these souls or Gods, we have declared; but to what Regions, People, and Cities they were ascribed as proper and tutelar gods; Origen, Tertullian, Apuleius, Diodorus, and very many other historians, partly relate to us: Therefore all people worshipped their gods with their proper ceremonies; The Beotians, Amphiarus; The Africans, Mopsus; the Egyptians, Osiris and Isis; the Ethiopians, who inhabite Mero, Jupiter and Bacchus; The Arabians; Bacchus and Venus; the Scythians, Minerva; the Naucratians, Serapis; the Syrians, Atargates; the Arabians, Diaphares; the Africans, Celestus; the Nornians, Tibelenus: In Italy also by the free Cities consecration, Delventius, was the God of the Crustumensians, Viridianus of the Narvensians, Aucharia of the Æsculans, Narsia of the Volsians, Valentia of the Otriculans, Nortia of the Sutrinians, Curis of the Phaliscians; these especially were famous. The Latians did adore with the highest worship, Mars; the Egyptians, Isis; the Moors, Iuba; the Macedonians, Cabrius; the Carthaginians, Uranus; the Latines, Faunus; the Romans, Quirinus; the Sabines, Sangus; the Athenians, Minerva; Samos, Juno; Paphos, Venus; Lemnos, Vulcan; Naxos, Bacchus; Delphos, Apollo; and as Ovid singeth in his Fasti,
The Carthaginians and Leucadians did worship Saturn; Crete, Pyreus, Homole, Ida, Elis and Lybia, Jupiter, where was his Oracle: Epirus, Latium, Gnidus, Lycia, Pisa, Macedonia, Mars; The Thermodonians, Scythians, and Thracia, the Sun; the Scythians did worship only one God, sacrificing an horse to him; the same also the Heliopolitans, and Assyrians did worship; and under the name of Apollo, the Rhodians, Hyperboreans and Milesians; and the mountains Parnassus, Phaselus, Cynthus, Soracte, were holy to him, and the Islands Delos, Claros, Tenedos and Mallois, a place in the Isle Lesbos, and the Grynean Grove or Town, besides the Cities, Patara, Chrysa, Tarapnas, Cyrrha, Delphos, Arrephina, Entrosi, Tegyra; Also Thebes, the Island Naxos, Nise a City of Arabia, Callichoros a river of Paphlagonia, were consecrated to him under the name of Bacchus and Dionysus; also Parnassus, and Cytheros mountains of Boetia, in which every second yeer  by course, the feasts Bacchanalia were kept; also the Thamaritans a people neighbors to the Hircanians did worship Bacchus with their own Ceremonies. The Assyrians first of all introduced the worship of Venus; then the Paphians in Cyprus, and Phenicians, and Cythereans, whom (as Ageus reports) the Athenians followed: amongst the Lacedomonians, Venus Armatha was worshipped; at Delphos, Venus Epitybia; she was also adored of the Coans; and in Amathus an island of the Aegean Sea, and in Memphi  a City of Egypt, and in Gnido and Sicilia, and the Idalian Grove, and the City Hypepa, and Erice a mountain of Sicilia, and in Calidonia, Cyrene and Samos; and no Deity of the old Gods (Aristotle being witness) is reported to have been worshipped with greater ceremonies, and in more places; the French did especially worship Mercury, calling him Teutates; so also the Arcadians, Hormopolites, Egyptians and Memphites. The Scythians about mount Taurus, did worship the Moon under the name of Diana; and in Ephesus, she had a most stately Temple; and in Mycena after the death of Thoantes, King of Taurica, her Image being stollen away by Iphigenia and Orestes, she was worshipped nigh Aricia. The Rite of Ceremonies being changed, she was worshipped likewise by the Magnesians, a people of Thessalia, and in Pisa, a City of Achaia, and in Tybur, and the Aventinum a Roman hill, and in Perga a City of Pamphila, and in Agras in the Kingdom of Attica; and the Catenian people are reported to have worshipped the Moon under the Masculine sexe; there were also other places consecreted to other Deities, as to Pallas, who is called Minerva, were consecrated Athens, the mountains Pyreus, Aracynthus, the River Tritones, and Alcomeneum a city of Boetia, and Neo one of the Islands of the Cyclades; The holy places of Ceres are, Eleusis, Attica, Enna, and Catana, Cities of Sicilia, and Mount Aetna; The chief worship to Vulcan was in the Island of Lemnos, and in Imbres, an Island of Thracia and Therasia, an Island consecrated to Vulcan, and also Sicilia. Vesta was the goddess of the Trojans, whom runaway Aeneas carryed into Italy, and to her are given the Phrygians, Idea, and Dindymus, mountains of Phrygia, and Reatum a City of Umbria; also the mountain Berecynthus, and Pessinuntium, a City of Phrygia; The Cities Carthage, Prosenna, Arhos, and Mycena, worshipped Juno; also the Island Samos, and the people of Phaliscia, Orchestus a City of Boetia, and Tenatus a Promontory of Laconia, were consecrated to Neptune, and the Trezenian Nation and City were under the protection of Neptune: of this sort therefore were the gods of the Nations, which did rule and govern them, which Moses himself in Deuteronomy calleth Gods of the earth, to the which all Nations were attributed, not signifying others then the heavenly Stars, and their souls.
That the heavens and the heavenly bodies are animated with certain Divine souls, is not only the opinion of Poets, and Philosophers, but also the assertion of the sacred Scriptures, and of the Catholicks; for Ecclesiates also describeth the soul of heaven, and Jerom upon same same expresly confesseth it: In like manner Origen in his book of Principles, seemeth to think that Celestiall bodies are animated, because they are said to receive commands from God, which is only agreeable to a reasonable nature; for it ii written, I have enjoyned a command on all the Stars; Moreover Job seemeth to have fully granted, that the Stars are not free from the stain of sin; for there we read, the Stars also are not clean in his sight; which cannot verily be referred to the brightness of their bodies; moreover that the Celestiall bodies are animated, even Eusebius the Pamphilian thought, and also Austin  in his Enchiridion; but of the latter writers Albertus Magnus in his book of four co-equals, and Thomas Aquinas in his book of Spiritual Creatures, and John Scot upon the second of the sentences; to these the most learned Cardinall Nich. Cusanus may be added; Moreover Aureolus himself in a strong disputation doth convince these things; who moreover thinketh it not strange, that the Heavenly bodies are worshipped with the worship of Doulia, and that their suffrages and helps are implored; to whom also Thomas himself consenteth, unless the occasion of Idolatry should hinder this rite; moreover Plotinus maintaineth that they know our wishes, and hear them; but if any one would contradict these, and account them sacrilegious tenents, let him hear Austin  in his Enchiridion, and in his book of Retractions, and Thomas in the second book against the Gentiles, and in his Quodlibets, and Scotus upon the sentences, and Gulielmus Parisiensis in his sum of the universe, who unanimously answer, that to say the heavenly bodies are animated or inanimated, nothing belongeth to the Catholick faith. Therefore although it seemeth to many ridiculous, that the souls themselves be placed in the spheres and Stars, and as it were the Gods of the Nations, every one doth govern his Regions, Cities, Tribes, People, Nations and Tongues, yet it will not seem strange to those who rightly understand it.
Now consequently we must discourse of Intelligences, spirits and Angels. An Intelligence is an intelligible substance, free from all gross and putrifying mass of a body, immortall, insensible, assisting all, having Influence over all; and the nature of all intelligences, spirits and Angels is the same. But I call Angels here, not those whom we usually call Devils, but spirits so called from the propriety of the word, as it were, knowing, understanding and wise. But of these according to the tradition of the Magicians, there are three kinds, the first of which they call supercelestiall, and minds altogether separated from a body, and as it were intellectuall spheres, worshipping the one only God, as it were their most firm and stable unity or center; wherefore they even call them gods, by reason of a certain particiption of the divinity; for they are always full of God, and overwhelmed with the Divine Nectar. These are only about God, and rule not the bodies of the world, neither are they fitted for the government of inferior things, but infuse the light received from God unto the inferior orders, and distribute every ones duty to all of them; The Celestial intelligences do next follow these in the second order, which they call worldly Angels viz being appointed besides the Divine worship for the spheres of the world, and for the government of every heaven & Star, whence they are divided into so many orders, as there are heavens in the world, & as there are Stars in the Heavens, and they called those Saturnine, who rule the Heaven of Saturn & Saturn himself; others Joviall, who rule the heaven of Jupiter and Jupiter himself, and in like maner they name diverse Angels, as well for the name, as the vertue of the other Stars; and because the old Astrologers did maintain maintain fifty five motions, therefore they invented so many Intelligences or Angels; they placed also in the Starry heaven, Angels, who might rule the signs, triplicities, decans, quinaries, degrees and Stars; for although the school of the Peripateticks assigne one onely intelligence to each of the Orbs of the Stars: yet seeing every Star and small part of the heaven hath its proper and different power and influence, it is necessary that it also have his ruling intelligence, which may confer power and operate; therefore they have established twelve Princes of the Angels, which rule the twelve signs of the Zodiack, and thirty six which may rule the so many Decans, and seventy two, which may rule the so many Quinaries of heaven, and the tongues of men and the Nations, and four which may rule the triplicities and Elements, and seven governors of the whole world, according to the seven planets, and they have given to all of them names, and seals, which they call Characters, and used them in their invocations, incantations, and carvings, decribing them in the instruments of their operations, images, plates, glasses, rings, papers, wax lights and such like; and if at any time they did operate for the Sun, they did invocate by the name of the Sun, and by the names of Solare Angels, and so of the rest. Thirdly they established Angels as Ministers for the disposing of those things which are below, which Origen calleth certain invisible powers to the which those things which are on earth, are committed to be disposed of. For sometimes they being visible to none do direct our journies  and all our businesses, are oft present at battels, and by secret helpes do give the desired successes to their friends, for they are said, that at their pleasures they can procure prosperity, and inflict adversity. In like manner they distribute these into more orders, so as some are fiery, some watery, some aerial, some terrestrial; which four species of Angels are computed according to the four powers of the Celestiall souls, viz the mind, reason, imagination, and the vivifying and moving nature; Hence the fiery follow the mind of the Celestiall souls, whence they concur to the contemplation of more sublime things, but the Aeriall follow the reason, and favor the rationall faculty, and after a certain manner separate it from the sensitive and vegetative; therefore it serveth for an active life, as the fiery for a contemplative, but the watery following the imagination, serve for a voluptuous life; The earthly following nature, favour vegetable nature; moreover they distinguish also this kind of Angels into Saturnine and Joviall, according to the names of the Stars, and the Heavens; further some are Orientall, some Occidentall, some Meridional, some Septentrionall; Moreover there is no part of the world destitute of the proper assistance of these Angels, not because they are there alone, but because they reign there especially, for they are everywhere, although some especially operate and have their influence in this place, some elsewhere; neither truly are these things to be understood, as though they were subject to the influences of the Stars, but as they have correspondence with the Heaven above the world, from whence especially all things are directed, and to the which all things ought to be conformable; whence as these Angels are appointed for diverse Stars, so also for diverse places and times, not that they are limited by time or place, neither by the bodies which they are appointed to govern, but because the order of wisdom hath so decreed, therefore they favor more, and patronize those bodies, places, times, stars; so they have called some Diurnall, some Nocturnall, other Meridionall; in like manner some are called Woodmen, some Mountaineers, some Fieldmen, some Domesticks. Hence the gods of the Woods, Country gods, Satyrs, familiars, Fairies of the fountains, Fairies of the Woods, Nymphs of the Sea, the Naiades, Neriades, Dryades, Pierides, Hamadryades, Potumides, Hinnides, Agapte, Pales, Pareades, Dodonæ, Feniliæ, Lavernæ, Pareæ, Muses, Aonides, Castalides, Heliconides, Pegasides, Meonides, Phebiades, Camenæ, the Graces, the Genii, Hobgoblins, and such like; whence they call them vulgar superiors, some the demi-gods  and goddesses; some of these are so familiar and acquainted with men, that they are even affected with humane perturbations, by whose instruction Plato thinketh that men do oftentimes wonderfull things, even as by the instruction of men, some beasts which are most nigh unto us, as Apes, Dogs, Elephants, do often strange things above their species; and they who have written the Chronicles of the Danes and Norwegians, do testifie, that spirits of diverse kinds in those regions are subject to mens commands; moreover some of these to be corporeall and mortall, whose bodies are begotten and dy, yet to be long lived is the opinion of the Egyptians and Platonists, and especially approved by Proclus. Plutarch also and Demetrius the Philosopher, and Aemilianus the Rhetoritian affirm the same; Therefore of these spirits of the third kind, as the opinion of the Platonists is; they report that there are so many Legions, as there are Stars in the Heaven, and so many spirits in every Legion, as in heaven it self Stars, but there are (as Athanasius delivereth) who think, that the true number of the good spirits, is according to the number of men ninety nine parts, according to the parable of the hundred sheep; others think only nine parts, according to the parable of the ten groats; others suppose the number of the Angels equal with men, because it is written, He hath appointed the bounds of the people according to the number of the Angels of God; and concerning their number many have written many things, but the latter Theologians following the master of the sentences, Austin  and Gregory easily resolve themselves, saying, that the number of the good Angels transcendeth humane capacity; to the which on the contrary, innumerable unclean spirits do correspond, there being so many in the inferior world, as pure spirits in the superior, and some Divines affirm that they have received this by revelations; under these they place a kind of spirits, subterrany or obscure, which the Platonists call Angels that failed, revengers of wickedness, and ungodliness, according to the decree of the Divine justice, and they call them evill Angels and wicked spirits, because they oft annoy and hurt even of their own accords; of these also they reckon more legions, and in like manner distinguishing them according to the names of the Stars and Elements, and parts of the world, they do place over them Kings, Princes and Rulers and the names of them; of these, four most mischievous Kings do rule over the other, according to the four parts of the world; under these many more Princes of Legions govern, and also many of private offices. Hence the Gorgones, Statenocte, the furies. Hence Tisiphone, Alecto, Megæra, Cerberus: They of this kind of spirits, Porphyry saith, inhabite a place nigh to the earth, yea within the earth it self; there is no mischief, which they dare not commit; they have altogether a violent and hurtfull custome, therefore they very much plot and endeavor violent and sudden mischiefs; and when they make incursions, sometimes they are wont to lie hide, but sometimes to offer open violence, and are very much delighted in all things done wickedly and contentiously.
But our Theologians, together with Dionysius, maintain the three distinctions of Angels; every one of which they divide into three orders, they call these Hierarchies, those quires, whom Proclus also distinguisheth by the number nine. They place therefore in the superior Hierarchies, Seraphim, Cherubim, and Thrones, as it were supercelestiall Angels contemplating the order of the Divine providence; the first in the goodness of God; the second in the Essence of God, as the form; the third in the wisdom. In the middle Hierarchy they place the Dominations, Vertues, and Powers, as it were wordly Angels concurring to the government of the world; the first of these command that which the other execute; the second are Ministers to the Heavens and sometimes conspire to the working of miracles; the third drive away those things which seem to be able to disturbe the Divine Law; but in the inferior Hierarchy they place the Principalities, Archangels,  whom also Iamblicus reckoneth up, these as ministering spirits descend to take care of inferior things; the first of these take care of publike  things, princes and magistrates, provinces and kingdoms, every one those that belong to themselves; when we read in Daniel, But the prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood me twenty one dayes; and Jesus the son of Syrach testifieth, that for every Nation a ruling Angel is appointed; which also Moses by his song in Deuteronomy seemeth to shew forth, saying, when the most High divided the Nations, he appointed them bounds according to the number of the Angels of God. The second are present at sacred duties, and direct the Divine worship about every man, and offer up the prayers and sacrifices of men before the gods. The third dispose every smaller matter, and to each thing each one is a preserver. There are also of these, who afford vertue to the least plants and stones and to all inferior things; to whom many things are common with God, many with men, and they are mediating Ministers; But Athanasius, besides Thrones, Cherubins, and Seraphins, who are next to God, and magnify him uncessantly with hymns and continuall praises, praying for our salvation, nameth the other orders, which by a common name he calleth the militia of heaven. The first of these is the Doctrinall order, of the which he was, who spake to Daniel, saying, Come, that I may teach thee what shall come to thy people in the last dayes: Then there is the tutelar order, of the which we read also in Daniel. Behold, Michael one of the Princes cometh to my help; and there, In that time shall rise up Michael a great Prince, who standeth for the sons of thy people; of this order was that Raphael also, who carryed forth and brought back Tobiah the younger; after this is the Procuratory Order, of the which mention is made in Job, where we read, if the Angel shall speak for him, he will intreat the Lord, and the Lord will be pleased with him; and of the same order is expounded also that which is written in the sixteenth Chapter of Ecclesiasticus, about the end. The works of the Lord have been made by his appointment from the beginning, and he hath distributed their portions from the time they have been made, he hath adorned their works for ever, they have not hungred, nor been wearied, and have not desisted from their works, none of them shall oppress his neighbor even for ever. The Ministeriall order followeth, of the which Paul to the Hebrews saith, Are they not all Ministring spirits, sent forth for them who shall be heirs of salvation? After these is the Auxiliary order, of the which we read in Esay, The Angels of the Lord went forth and slew in the tent of the Assyrians. thousands. The Receptory order of souls followeth this, of which we read in Luke, the soul of Lazarus was carryed by Angels into the bosom of Abraham, and there we are taught, that we should make to our selves friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that we may be received into eternall Tabernacles. Moreover, there is the order of the Assistants, of the which we reade in Zachary. These are the two sons of the Oyl  of splendor, who assist the ruler of the whole earth, but the Theologians of the Hebrews do otherwise number and call these orders;
for in the highest place are those which they call היות הקדש  that is, creatures of sanctity, or by the which God אהיה  giveth the gift of being.
In the second place succeed Ophanim אופנים that is forms or wheels, by the which God יהוה  distinguisheth the Chaos:
In the third place are Aralim אראלים great, strong, and mighty Angels, by the which Jehova  Elohim pronounced or Jehova  joyned with He היהוה administreth form to the liquid matter:
In the fourth place are Hasmalim השמלים by which El אל God framed the effigies of bodies.
The fifth order is Seraphim שרפים by the which God Elohim Gibor אלהים גיבר draweth forth the elements.
The sixt  is Malachim מלאכים that is of Angels, by the which God Eloha אלוה, produceth metals.
The seventh Elohim אלהים that is the gods by the which God Jehovah Sabaoth יהוה צבאות produceth vegetables;
The eighth Beni Elohim בני אלהים that is the sons of God, by the which God Elohim Sabaoth אלהים צבאות procreateth Animals;
The ninth & lowest Cherubim כרובים by the which God Sadai שדי createth mankind;
under these is the order Animasticus called Issim אישים that is nobles, strong men, or blessed, by the which God Adonai אדני bestoweth prophecie.
There are some of the School of the Theologians, who distribute the evill spirits into nine degrees, as contrary to the nine orders of the Angels; Therefore the first of these are those which are called false gods, who usurping the name of God, would be worshipped for gods, and require sacrifices and adorations, as that Devil, who saith to Christ, if thou wilt fal  down and worship me, I will give thee all these things, shewing him all the kingdoms of the world; and the Prince of these is he who said, I will ascend ahove the height of the clouds, and will he like to the most High; who is therefore called Beelzebub, that is, an old god. In the second place follow the spirits of lies, of which sort was he who went forth, and was a lying spirit in the mouth of the Prophets of Achab; and the Prince of these is the Serpent Pytho; from whence Apollo is called Pythius, and that woman a witch in Samuel, and the other in the Gospel, who had Pytho in their belly. Therefore this kind of Devils joyneth himself to the Oracles, and deludeth men by divinations, and predictions, so that he may deceive. In the third order are the vessels of iniquity, which are also called the vessels of wrath, these are the inventors of evil things and of all wicked arts, as in Plato, that devill Theutus who taught Cards and Dice; for all wickedness, malice and deformity proceedeth from these; of the which in Genesis, in the Benedictions of Simeon and Levi, Jacob saith, vessels of iniquity are in their habitations; into their counsel let not my soul come; whom the Psalmist calleth vessels of death, Esay vessels of fury, and Jeremy vessels of wrath, Ezekiel vessels of destroying and slaying, and their prince is Belial, which is interpreted without a yoak  or disobedient, a prevaricator and an Apostate, of whom Paul to the Corinthians saith, what agreement hath Christ with Beliall? Fourthly follow the revengers of evil, and their Prince is Asmodeus, viz causing judgement; After these in the fifth place come the deluders, who Imitate miracles, and serve wicked conjurers and witches, and seduce the people by their miracles, as the serpent seduced Eve, and their Prince is Satan, of whom is written in the Revelations, that he seduced the whole world, doing great signs, and causing fire to descend from heaven in the sight of men, seducing the inhabitants of the earth, by reason of the signs, which are given him to do. Sixthly the Aeriall powers offer themselves; they joyn  themselves to thundering and lightnings, corrupting the aire, causing pestilences and other evils; in the number of which, are the four Angels, of whom the Revelation speaketh, to whom it is given to hurt the Earth and Sea, holding the four windes, from the four corners of the earth; and their prince is called Meririm; he is the Meridian Devill, a boyling  spirit, a devill raging in the South, whom Paul to the Ephesians calleth the Prince of the power of this air, and the spirit which worketh in the children of disobedience. The seventh mansion the furies possess, which are powers of evil, discords, war and devastations, whose Prince in the Revelations is called in Greek Apollyon, in Hebrew Abaddon, that is destroying and wasting. In the eighth place are the accusers, or the inquisitors, whose Prince is Astarath, that is, a searcher out: in the Greek language he is called Diabolos, that is an accuser, or calumniator, which in the Revelations is called the accuser, of the brethren, accusing them night & day before the face of our God. Moreover the Tempters and Ensnarers have the last place, one of which is present with every man, which we therefore call the evill Genius, and their Prince is Mammon, which is interpreted covetousness: But all unanimously maintain that evil spirits do wander up & down in this inferiour world, enraged against all, whom they therefore call Devils, of whom Austin  in his first hook of the incarnation of the word to Januarius, saith: Concerning the devils and his Angels contrary to Vertues, the Ecclesiasticall preaching hath taught, that there are such things; but what they are and how they are, he hath not clear enough expounded: yet there is this opinion amongst most, that this Devill was an Angel, and being made an Apostate, perswaded very many of the Angels to decline with himself, who even unto this day are called his Angels: Greece notwithstanding thinketh not that all these are damned, nor that they are all purposefully evil, but that from the Creation of the world, the dispensation of things is ordained by this means, that the tormenting of sinful souls is made over to them: The other Theologians say that not any Devill was created evill, but that they were driven and cast forth of Heaven, from the orders of good Angels for their pride, whose fall not only our and the Hebrew Theologians, but also the Assyrians, Arabians, Egyptians and Greeks do confirm by their tenents; Pherecydes the Syrian describeth the fall of the Devils and that Ophis, that is, the Devilish serpent, was the head of that rebelling Army; Trismegistus sings the same fall in his Pimander, and Homer under the name of Ararus, in his verses; and Plutarch in his speech of usury, signifieth, that Empedocles knew that the fall of the devils was after this manner: the devils also themselves often confess their fall: they therefore being cast forth into this valley of misery, some that are nigh to us wander up and down in this obscure air, others inhabit lakes, rivers and seas, others the earth, and terrifie  earthly things, and invade those who dig Wells and Metals, cause the gapings of the earth, strike together the foundation of mountains, and vex not only men, but also other creatures; some being content with laughter and delusion only, do contrive rather to weary men, then to hurt them, some heightning themselves to the length of a Giants body, and again shrinking themselves up to the smallness of the Pigmies, and changing themselves into divers forms, do disturb men with vain fear: others study lies and blasphemies, as we read of one in the third book of Kings, saying, I will go forth and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets of Achab: but the worst sort of devils are those, who lay wait and overthrow passengers in their journeys, and rejoyce in wars and effusion of blood, and afflict men with most cruell stripes: we read of such in Matthew, for fear of whom no man durst pass that way; moreover the scripture reckoneth up nocturnall, diurnall, and meridionall devils, and describeth other spirits of wickedness by divers names, as we read in Esay of Satyrs, Scrichowls, Syrenes, storks, Owls; and in the Psalms of Aspes, Basiliskes, Lions, Dragons; and in the Gospel we read of Scorpions and Mammon and the prince of this world and rulers of darkness, of all which Beelzebub is the prince, whom Scripture calleth the prince of wickedness. Porphyrie  saith, their prince is Serapis, who is also called Pluto by the Greeks, and also Cerberus is chief amongst them, that three-headed dog: viz Because he is conversant in three elements, air, water, and earth, a most pernicious devill; whence also Proserpina, who can do very much in these three elements, is their Princess, which she testifies of her self in her answers, in these verses.
Of threefold nature I Lucina fair,
The daughter am, sent from above the air;
The golden Phoebe am, and with heads trine,
Whom many forms do change, and the trine sign
Which I bear with forms of earth, fire, and air,
I for black mastives  of the earth do care.
Origens opinion concerning the devils, is: The spirits who act of their own free will, left the service of God with their Prince the devil; if they began to repent a little, are clothed with humane flesh; That further by this repentance, after the resurrection, by the same means by the which they came into the flesh, they might at the last return to the vision of God, being then also freed from etheriall and aeriall bodies, and then all knees are to be bowed to God, of Celestiall, Terrestrial, and Infernal things, that God may be all in all: Moreover Saint Ireneus approveth the opinion of Justine Martyr, who hath said, Satan never durst speak blasphemy against God, before that the Lord came on the earth, because that he knew not as yet his condemnation; but there are many of the devils who are fallen, who hope for their salvation: Very many think by the History of Paul the Hermite written by Jerome, & reverenced by the Church with Canonical hours, also by the Legend of Brandan, they are so taught; and even by this Argument they maintain that their prayers are heard; that we read in the Gospels, that Christ heard the prayers of the devils, and granted that they should enter into the Herd of Swine; to these also agreeth the. Psalm, according to our supputation, but according to the supputation of the Hebrews the, where we read, the Ethiopians shall fall before him, and his enemies lick the dust; there it is read according to the Hebrew text, they that inhabit the desert, shall bend their knees before him, that is, the aiery spirits shall adore him, as the Cabalists affirm, and his enemies shall lick the dust, which they understand of Zazell, and his Army: of which we read in Genesis, Dust shalt thou eat all the dayes of thy life, and elsewhere the Prophet saith, because the dust of the earth is his bread; hence the Cabalists think, that even some devils shall be saved, which opinion also it is manifest that Origen was of.
Concerning the bodies of Angels, there is a great dissension betwixt the late Divines, and Philosophers; for Thomas affirms that all angels are incorporeall, yea evil angels, yet that they do assume bodies sometimes, which after awhile they put off again; Dionysius in Divine Names strongly affirms that Angels are incorporeal. Yet Austin  upon Genesis delivers his opinion, that Angels are said to be Aery, and Fiery Animals: because they have the nature of Aeriall bodies, neither can they be dissolved by death, because the element which is more active than passive is predominant in them; the same seem to affirm, that all Angels in the beginning of their creation had Aeriall bodies, being formed of the more pure, and superiour part of the air, being more fit to act, then to suffer; and that those bodies were after the confirmation preserved in good Angels, but changed in the evil in their fall, into the quality of more thick air, that they might be tormented in the fire: Moreover Magnus Basilius doth attribute bodies not only to Devils, but also to pure angels, as certain thin, Aeriall, pure spirits; to which Gregory Nazianzen doth agree. Apuleius was of opinion, that all angels had not bodies; for in the book of the Demon of Socrates, he saith, that there is a more propitious kind of spirits, which being alwayes free from corporeal bonds, are procured by certain prayers. But Psellus the Platonist, and Christianus do think that the nature of spirits is not without a body; but yet not that the body of angels, & devils are the same; for that is without matter; but the bodies of devils are in a manner materiall, as shadows, and subject to passion, that they being struck are pained, and may be burnt in the fire, into conspicuous ashes, which as is recorded, was done in Tuscia. And although it be a spirituall body, yet it is most sensible, and being touched, suffers; and although it be cut asunder, yet comes together again, as air and water, but yet in the mean time is much pained. Hence it is that they fear the edge of the sword, and any weapon. Hence in Virgil the Sybill saith to Aeneas,
Upon which Servius saith that she would have Aeneas have his sword consecrated. Orpheus also describes the kinds of Demoniacall bodies; there is indeed one body, which onely abides the fire, but being seen, doth not suffer, which Orpheus calls fiery, and Celestiall Demons: the other is contemperated with the mixtion of fire, and air, whence they are called Etheriall, and Aeriall; to which if any waterish thing was added, there arose a third kinde, whence they are Called watery, which sometimes are seen: to which if any earthiness be added, this is not very thick; they are called Terrene Demons, and they are more conspicuous, and sensible. Now the bodies of sublime Demons are nourished of the most pure Etheriall element, and are not rashly to be seen of any, unless they be sent from God; being weaved of such bright threads, and so small, that they transmit all the rayes of our sight by their finess, and reverberate them with splendor, and deceive by their subtlety; of which Calcidius saith, Etheriall, and Aeriall Demons, because their bodies have not so much fire as that they are conspicuous, nor yet so much earth that the solidity of them resists the touch, and their whole composure being made up of the clearness of the skie, and moisture of the air, hath joyned  together an indissoluble superficies. The other Demons are neither so appearable, nor invisible, being sometimes conspicuous are turned into divers figures, and put upon themselves bodies like shadows, of blood-less images, drawing the filthiness of a gross body, and they have too much communion with the Wood (which the Ancients did call the wicked soul) and by reason of their affinity with earth, and water, are also taken with Terrene pleasures, and lust; of which sort are hobgoblins, and Incubi, and Succubi, of which number it is no absurd conjecture to think that Melusina  was: yet there is none of the Demons (as Marcus supposeth) is to be supposed male or female, seeing this difference of sex belongs to compounds, but the bodies of Demons are simple, neither can any of the Demons turn themselves into all shapes at their pleasure; but to the fiery, and aiery it is easie so to do, viz: to change themselves into what shapes their imagination conceives: now subterraneall and dark Demons, because their nature being concluded in the streights of a thick and unactive body, cannot make the diversity of shapes, as others can. But the waterie, and such as dwell upon the moist superfices of the earth, are by reason of the moistness of the element, for the most part like to women; of such kinde are the fairies of the Rivers, and Nymphs of the Woods: but those which inhabite dry places, being of dryer bodies, shew themselves in form of men, as Satyrs, or Onosceli, with Asses legs, or Fauni, and Incubi, of which he  saith, he learned by experience there were many, and that some of them oftentimes did desire, and made compacts with women to lie with them: and that there were some Demons, which the French call Dusii, that did continually attempt this way of lust.
It is the common opinion of Divines, that all evil spirits are of that nature, that they hate God as well as men; therefore Divine providence hath set over us more pure spirits, with whom he hath entrusted us, as with Shepheards, and Governours, that they should daily help us, and drive away evil spirits from us, and curb, and restrain them, that they should not hurt us as much as they would; as is read in Tobia, that Raphael did apprehend the Demon called Asmodeus, and bound him in the wilderness of the upper Egypt. Of these Hesiod saith, there are  of Jupiters immortall spirits living on the Earth, which are the keepers of mortall men, who that they might observe justice and mercifull deeds, having clothed themselves with air, go every where on the Earth. For there is no Prince, nor potentate could be safe, nor any woman continue uncorrupted, no man in this valley of ignorance could come to the end appointed to him by God, if good spirits did not secure us; Or if evill spirits should be permitted to satisfie the wils  of men; As therefore amongst the good spirits there is a proper keeper or protector deputed to every one, corroborating the spirit of the man to good; so of evil spirits there is sent forth an enemy ruling over the flesh, and desire thereof; and the good spirit fights for us as a preserver against the enemie, and flesh; Now man betwixt these contenders is the midle, and left in the hand of his own Counsell, to whom he will give victory; we cannot therefore accuse Angels, if they do not bring the Nations entrusted to them, to the knowledge of the true God, to true piety, and suffer them to fall into errours and perverse worship: but it is to be imputed to themselves, who have of their own accord declined from the right path, adhering to the spirits of errours, giving victory to the Devill; for it is in the hand of man to adhere to whom he please, and overcome whom he will, by whom, if once the enemy the devill be overcome, he is made his servant, and being overcome, cannot fight any more with another, as a wasp that hath lost his sting: to which opinion Origen assents in his book Periarchon, concluding, that the Saints fighting against evil spirits, and overcoming, do lessen their armie, neither can he that is overcome by any, molest any more; As therefore there is given to every man a good spirit, so also there is given to every man an evil Diabolicall spirit, whereof each seeks an union with our spirit, and endeavours to attract it to it self, and to be mixed with it, as wine with water; the good indeed, through all good works conformable to it self, change us into Angels, by uniting us, as it is writ of John Baptist in Malachie: Behold I send mine Angel before thy face: of which transmutation, and union it is writ elsewhere; He which adheres to God is made one spirit with him. An evil spirit also by evil works, studies to make us conformable to it self, and to unite, as Christ saith of Judas, Have not I chosen twelve, & one of you is a devil? And this is that which Hermes saith, when a spirit hath influence upon the soul of man, he scatters the seed of his own notion, whence such a soul being sowen  with seeds, and full of fury, brings forth thence wonderfull things, and whatsoever are the offices of spirits: for when a good spirit hath influence upon a holy soul, it doth exalt it to the light of wisdom; but an evil spirit being transfused into a wicked soul, doth stir it up to theft, to man-slaughter, to lusts, and whatsoever are the offices of evil spirits. Good spirits (as saith Iamblicus) purge the souls most perfectly; and some bestow upon us other good things; they being present do give health to the body, vertue to the soul, security to the soul, what is mortall in us they take away, cherish heat, and make it more efficacious to life, and by an Harmonie  do alwayes infuse light into an intelligible mind. But whether there be many keepers of a man, or one alone, Theologians differ amongst themselves; we think there are more, the Prophet saying, he hath given his Angels a charge concerning thee, that they should keep thee in all thy wayes: which as saith Hierome, is to be understood of any man, as well as of Christ. All men therefore are governed by the ministry of divers Angels, and are brought to any degree of vertue, deserts, and dignity, who behave themselves worthy of them; but they which carry themselves unworthy of them are deposed, and thrust down, as well by evil spirits, as good spirits, unto the lowest degree of misery, as their evil merits shall require: but they that are attributed to the sublimer Angels, are preferred before other men, for Angels having the care of them, exalt them, and subject others to them by a certain occult power; which although neither of them perceive, yet he that is subjected, feels a certain yoke of presidency, of which he cannot easily acquit himself, yea he fears and reverenceth that power, which the superiour Angels make to flow upon superiours, and with a certain terrour bring the inferiours into a fear of presidency. This did Homer seem to be sensible of, when he saith, that the Muses begot of Jupiter, did alwayes as inseparable companions assist the Kings begot of Jupiter, who by them were made venerable, and magnificent. So we read that M. Antonius being formerly joyned  in singular friendship with Octavus Augustus, were wont alwayes to play together. But when as alwayes Augustus went away conquerour, that a certain Magician Counselled M. Antonius thus. O Antony, what dost thou do with that yong  man? shun, and avoid him, for although thou art elder then he, and art more skillfull then he, and art better descended then he, and hast endured the Wars of more Emperours, yet thy Genius doth much dread the Genius of this yong man, and thy Fortune flatter his Fortune; unless thou shalt shun him, it seemeth wholly to decline to him. Is not the Prince like other men, how should other men fear, and reverence him, unless a Divine terrour should exalt him, and striking a fear into others, depress them, that they should reverence him as a Prince? Wherefore we must endeavour, that being purified by doing well, and following sublime things, and choosing opportune times, and seasons, we he entrusted or committed to a degree of sublimer, and more potent Angels, who taking care of us, we may deservedly be preferred before others.
As every Region in the Celestials hath a certain Star, and Celestiall image which hath influence upon it before others: so also in supercelestials doth it obtain a certain Intelligence set over it, and guarding it, with infinite other ministring spirits of its order, all which are called by a common name, the Sons of Elohim Sabaoth בני אלהים צבאות i.e. Sons of the God of hosts. Hence as often as the most high doth deliberate of War, or slaughter, or the desolation of any Kingdom, or subduing of any people in these inferiours, then no otherwise, when these shall come upon the earth, there proceeds a conflict of these spirits above, as it is written in Isaiah, The Lord of Hosts shall visit the Army of the high, in the heavens; and the Kings of the earth, in the earth; of which conflicts of spirits and presidents, we read also in Daniel, viz of the Prince of the Kingdom of the Persians, of the Prince of the Grecians, of the Prince of the peoplc of Israel; and of their conflict amongst themselves, of which also Homer seemed formerly to be sensible of, when he sang,
Nevertheless seeing there he in every region spirits of all sorts, yet they are more powerfull there which are of the same order with the president of that region. So in the Solary region, the Solary spirits are most potent; in the Lunary, Lunary, and so of the rest. And hence it is that various events of our affairs offer themselves, & follow us in places and provinces, being more Fortunate in one place more then another, where viz the Demon our Genius shall receive more power, or we shall there obtain a more powerfull Demon of the same order. So Solary men, if they shall travell into a Solary region, or province, shall he made there far more fortunate, because there they shall have more powerfull, and more advantagious conducters or Genii, by the present aid of whom they shall be brought beyond expectation, and their own power, to happy events. Hence it is that the choice of a place, region, or time doth much conduce to the happiness of life where any one shall dwell, & frequent, according to the nature & instinct of his own Genius. Sometimes also the change of the name doth conduce to the same, for whereas the properties of names being the significators of things themselves, do as it were in a glass declare the conditions of their forms; thence it comes to pass, that names being changed, the things oftentimes are changed. Hence the sacred writ doth not without cause bring in God, whilest he was blessing Abram, and Jacob, changing their names, calling the one Abraham, and the other Israel. Now the ancient Phylosophers  teach us to know the nature of the Genius of every man, by Stars, their influx, and aspects, which are potent in the Nativity of any one; but with instructions so divers, and differing amongst themselves, that it is much difficult to understand the mysteries of the heavens by their directions. For Porphyrie  seeks the Genius of the Star, which is the Lady of the Nativity: but Maternus either from thence, or from the Planets, which had then most dignities, or from that into whose house the Moon was to enter after that, which at the birth of the man it doth retain. But the Caldeans  enquire after the Genius, either from the Sun above, or from the Moon. But others, and many Hebrews think it is to be enquired after from some corner of the heaven, or from all of them. Others seek a good Genius from the eleventh house, which therefore they call a good Demon; but an evil Genius from the sixth, which therefore they call an evil Demon. But seeing the inquisition of these is laborious, & most occult, we shall far more easily enquire into the nature of our Genius from our selves, observing those things which the instinct of nature doth dictate to, and the heaven inclines us to from our infancy, being distracted with no contagion, or those things which the minde, the soul being freed from vain cares, and sinister affections, and impediments being removed, doth suggest to us: These without all doubt are the perswasions  of a Genius which is given to every one from their birth, leading, and perswading us to that whither the Star thereof inclines us to.
Every man hath a threefold good Demon, as a proper keeper, or preserver, the one whereof is holy, another of the nativity, and the other of profession. The holy Demon is one, according to the Doctrine of the Egyptians, assigned to the rationall soul, not from the Stars or Planets, but from a supernaturall cause, from God himself, the president of Demons, being universall, above nature: This doth direct the life of the soul, & doth alwaies put good thoughts into the minde, being alwaies active in illuminating us, although we do not alwaies take notice of it; but when we are purified, and live peaceably, then it is perceived by us, then it doth as it were speak with us, and communicates its voyce  to us, being before silent, and studyeth daily to bring us to a sacred perfection. Also by the ayd  of this Demon we may avoid the malignity of a Fate, which being religiously worshipped by us in honesty, and sanctity, as we know was done by Socrates; the Pythagoreans think we may be much helped by it, as by dreams, and signs, by diverting evill things, and carefully procuring good things. Wherefore the Pythagorians were wont with one consent to pray to Jupiter, that he would either preserve them from evill, or shew them by what Demon it should be done. Now the Demon of the nativity, which is called the Genius, doth here descend from the disposition of the world, and from the circuits of the Stars, which were powerfull in his nativity. Hence there be some that think, when the soul is coming down into the body, it doth out of the quire of the Demons naturally choose a preserver to it self, nor only choose this guide to it self, but hath that willing to defend it. This being the executor, and keeper of the life, doth help it to the body, and takes care of it, being Communicated to the body, and helps a man to that very office, to which the Celestials have deputed him, being born. Whosoever therefore have received a fortunate Genius, are made thereby vertuous in their works, efficacious, strong, and prosperous. Wherefore they are called by the Phylosophers  fortunate, or luckily born. Now the Demon of profession is given by the Stars, to which such a profession, or sect, which any man hath professed, is subjected, which the soul, when it began to make choyce  in this body, and to take upon itself dispositions, doth secretly desire. This Demon is changed, the profession being changed; then according to the dignity of the profession, we have Demons of our profession more excellent and sublime, which successively take care of man, which procures a keeper of profession, as he proceeds from vertue to vertue. When therefore a profession agrees with our nature, there is present with us a Demon of our profession like unto us, and sutable  to our Genius, and our life is made more peaceable, happy, and prosperous: but when we undertake a profession unlike, or contrary to our Genius, our life is made laborious, and troubled with disagreeing patrons. So it falls out that some profit more in any science, or art, or office, in a little time, and with little pains, when another takes much pains, and studies hard, and all in vain: and, although no science, art, or vertue be to be contemned, yet that thou maist live prosperously, carry on thy affairs happily; in the first place know thy good Genius, and thy nature, and what good the celestiall disposition promiseth thee, and God the distributor of all these, who distributes to each as he pleaseth, and follow the beginnings of these, profess these, be conversant in that vertue to which the most high distributor doth elevate, and lead thee, who made Abraham excell in justice and clemency, Isaac with fear, Jacob with strength, Moses with meekness and Miracles, Joshua in war, Phinias n zeal, David in religion, and victory, Solomon in knowledge and fame, Peter in faith, John in charity, Jacob in devotion, Thomas in prudence, Magdalen in contemplation, Martha in officiousness. Therefore in what vertue thou thinkest thou canst most easily be a proficient in, use diligence to attain to the height thereof; that thou maist excell in one, when in many thou canst not: but in the rest endeavour to be as great a proficient as thou canst: but if thou shalt have the overseers of nature, and religion agreeable, thou shalt finde a double progress of thy nature, and profession: but if they shall be disagreeing, follow the better, for thou shalt better perceive at some time a preserver of an excellent profession, then of nativity.
We might doubt whether Angels, or Demons, since they be pure spirits, use any vocal speech, or tongue amongst themselves, or to us; but that Paul in some place saith, If I speak with the tongue of men, or angels: but what their speech or tongue is, is much doubted by many. For many think that if they use any Idiome, it is Hebrew, because that was the first of all, and came from heaven, and was before the confusion of languages in Babylon, in which the Law was given by God the Father, and the Gospell was preached by Christ the Son, and so many Oracles were given to the Prophets by the Holy Ghost: and seeing all tongues have, and do undergo various mutations, and corruptions, this alone doth alwaies continue inviolated. Moreover an evident sign of this opinion is, that though each Demon, and Intelligence do use the speech of those nations, with whom they do inhabit, yet to them that understand it, they never speak in any Idiome, but in this alone. But now how Angels speak it is hid from us, as they themselves are. Now to us that we may speak, a tongue is necessary with other instruments, as are the jaws, palate, lips, teeth, throat, lungs, the aspera arteria, and muscles of the breast, which have the beginning of motion from the soul. But if any speak at a distance to another, he must use a louder voice; but if neer, he whispers in his ear: and if he could be coupled to the hearer, a softer breath would suffice; for he would slide into the hearer without any noise, as an image in the eye, or glass. So souls going out of the body, so Angels, so Demons speak: and what man doth with a sensible voyce, they do by impressing the conception of the speech in those to whom they speak, after a better manner then if they should express it by an audible voyce. So the Platonists say that Socrates perceived his Demon by sense indeed, but not of this body, but by the sense of the etheriall body concealed in this: after which manner Avicen believes the Angels were wont to be seen, and heard by the Prophets: That instrument, whatsoever the vertue be, by which one spirit makes known to another spirit what things are in his minde, is called by the Apostle Paul the tongue of Angels. Yet oftentimes also they send forth an audible voyce, as they that cryed at the ascension of the Lord, Ye men of Galile, why stand ye there gazing into the heaven? And in the old law they spake with divers of the Fathers with a sensible voyce, but this never but when they assumed bodies. But with what senses those spirits and Demons hear our invocations, and prayers, and see our ceremonies, we are altogether ignorant.
For there is a spirituall body of Demons everywhere sensible by nature, so that it toucheth, seeth, heareth, without any medium, and nothing can be an impediment to it: Yet neither do they perceive after that manner as we do with different organs, but haply as sponges drink in water, so do they all sensible things with their body, or some other way unknown to us; neither are all animals endowed with those organs; for we know that many want ears, yet we know they perceive a sound, but after what manner we know not.
Many and divers are the names of good spirits, and bad: but their proper, and true names, as those of the Stars, are known to God alone, who only numbers the multitude of Stars, and calls them all by their names, whereof none can be known by us but by divine revelation, and very few are expressed to us in the sacred writ. But the masters of the Hebrews think that the names of the angels were imposed upon them by Adam, according to that which is written, The Lord brought all things which he had made unto Adam, that he should name them, and as he called any thing, so the name of it was. Hence the Hebrew Mecubals think, together with Magicians, that it is in the power of man to impose names upon Spirits, but of such a man only who is dignified, and elevated to this vertue by some divine gift, or sacred authority: but because a name that may express the nature of divinity, or the whole vertue of angelical essences cannot be made by any humane voyce, therefore names for the most part are put upon them from their works, signifying some certain office, or effect, which is required by the quire of Spirits: which names then no otherwise then oblations, and sacrifices offered to the Gods, obtain efficacy and vertur to draw any spirituall substance from above or beneath, for to make any desired effect. I have seen, and known some writing on virgin parchment the name and seal of some spirit in the hour of the Moon: which when afterward he gave to be devoured by a water-frog, and had muttered over some verse, the frog being let go into the water, rains, and shours  presently followed. I saw also the same man inscribing the name of another Spirit with the seal thereof in the hour of Mars, which was given to a Crow, who being let go, after a verse muttered over, presently there followed from that corner of the heaven, whither he flew, lightnings, shakings, and horrible thunders, with thick clouds: Neither were those names of spirits of an unknown tongue, neither did they signifie any thing else but their offices. Of this kinde are the names of those angels, Raziel, Gabriel, Michael, Raphael, Haniel, which is as much as the vision of God, the vertue of God, the strength of God, the medicine of God, the glory of God. In like manner in the offices of evill Demons are read their names, a player, deceiver, a dreamer, fornicator, and many such like.
So we receive from many of the ancient Fathers of the Hebrews the names of angels set over the planets and signs: over Saturn, Zapkiel; over Jupiter, Zadkiel; over Mars, Camael; over the Sun, Raphael; over Venus, Haniel; over Mercury, Michael; over the Moon, Gabriel. These are those seven Spirits which always stand before the face of God, to whom is entrusted the disposing of the whole celestial, and terrene Kingdoms, which is under the Moon. For these (as say the more curious Theologians) govern all things by a certain vicissitude of hours, daies, and years, as the Astrologers teach concerning the planets which they set over; which therefore Mercurius Trismegistus calls the seven governors of the world, who by the heavens, as by instruments, distribute the influences of all the Stars and signs upon these inferiours.
Now there are some that do ascribe them to the Stars, by names somewhat differing, saying, that over Saturn is set an intelligence called Oriphiel; over Jupiter Zachariel; over Mars Zamael; over the Sun Michael; over Venus Anael; over Mercury Raphael; over the Moon Gabriel. And every one of these governs the world  years, and four months; and the government begins from the Intelligence of Saturn; afterward in order, the Intelligences of Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, the Moon, the Sun raign, and then the government returns to the Spirit of Saturn. Abbas Tritemius  writ to Maximilian Caesar a speciall Treatise concerning these, which he that will thoroughly examine, may from thence draw great knowledge of future times. Over the twelve Signs are set these, viz over Aries Malchidael; over Taurus Asmodel; over Gemini Ambriel; over Cancer Muriel; over Leo Verchiel; over Virgo Hamaliel; over Libra Zuriel; over Scorpio Barchiel; over Sagittarius Advachiel; over Capricorn Hanael; over Aquarius Cambiel; over Pisces Barchiel. Of these Spirits set over the planets, and Signs, John made mention in the Revelation, speaking of the former in the beginning; And of the seven Spirits which are in the presence of the Throne of God, which I finde are set over the seven planets,  in the end of the book, where he describes the platform of the heavenly City, saying that in the twelve gates thereof were twelve Angels. There are again twenty eight Angels, which rule in the twenty eight mansions of the Moon, whose names in order are these: Geniel, Enediel, Amixiel, Azariel, Gabiel, Dirachiel, Seheliel, Amnediel, Barbiel, Ardefiel, Neciel, Abdizuel, Jazeriel, Ergediel, Ataliel, Azeruel, Adriel, Egibiel, Amutiel, Kyriel, Bethnael, Geliel, Requiel, Abrinael, Aziel, Tagriel, Alheniel, Amnixiel.
There are also four Princes of the Angels, which are set over the four winds, and over the four parts of the world, whereof Michael is set over the Eastern wind; Raphael over the Western; Gabriel over the Northern; Nariel, who by some is called Uriel, is over the Southern. There are also assigned to the Elements these, viz to the air Cherub; to the water Tharsis; to the Earth Ariel; to the Fire Seruph, or according to Philon, Nathaniel. Now every one of these Spirits is a great Prince, and hath much power and freedome in the dominion of his own planets, and signs, and in their times, years, months, daies, and hours, and in their Elements, and parts of the world, and winds. And every one of them rules over many legions; and after the same manner amongst evil spirits, there are four which as most potent Kings are set over the rest, according to the four parts of the world, whose names are these, viz Urieus, King of the East; Amaymon, King of the South; Paymon, King of the West; Egyn, King of the North, which the Hebrew Doctors perhaps call more rightly thus, Samael, Azazel, Azael, Mahazael under whom many other rule as princes of legions, and rulers; also there are innumerable Demons of private offices. Moreover the ancient Theologians of the Greeks reckon up six Demons, which they call Telchines, others Alastores; which bearing ill will to men, taking up water out of the river Styx with their hand, sprinkle it upon the earth, whence follow Calamities, plagues, and famines; and these are said to be Acteus, Megalezius, Ormenus, Lycus, Nicon, Mimon. But he which desires to know exactly the distinct names, offices, places, and times of Angels, and evil Demons, let him enquire into the book of Rabbi Simon of the Temples. And in his book of lights, and in his treatise of the greatness of stature, and in the treatise of the Temples of Rabbi Ishmael, and in almost all the Commentaries of his book of formation, and he shall finde it written at large concerning them.
There are also other sacred names of good, and evil Spirits deputed to each offices, of much greater efficacy then the former, which the Hebrew Mecubals drew forth out of sacred writ, according to that art which they teach concerning them; as also certain names of God are drawn forth out of certain places: the generall rule of these is, that wheresoever any thing of divine essence is expressed in the Scripture, from that place the name of God may rightly be gathered; but in what place soever in the Scripture the name of God is found expressed, there mark what office lies under that name. Wheresoever therefore the Scripture speaks of the office or work of any spirit, good, or bad, from thence the name of that spirit, whether good, or bad, may be gathered; this unalterable rule being observed, that of good spirits we receive the names of good spirits, of evill the names of evill: & let us not confound black with white, nor day with night, nor light with darkness: which by these verses, as by an example, is manifest. Let them be as dust before the face of the winde, and let the Angel of the Lord scatter them: Let their waies  be darkness, And slippery, and let the angel of the Lord pursue them.
I Finde yet another kinde of names given to the spirits from those things, which they are set over, their names being as it were borrowed from the Stars, or men, or places, or times, or such like things, the divine name being added at the end, thus. The spirit of Saturn is called Sabathiel: the Spirit of Jupiter, Zedekiel: the spirit of Mars, Madimiel: the Spirit of the Sun, Semeliel, or Semeschia; the Spirit of Venus, Nogahel; the spirit of Mercury, Cochabiah, or Cochabiel; the Spirit of the Moon, Jareahel, or Levanael. In like manner also they call the Spirits which are set over the signes by the names of the signes in order; from Aries Teletiel, Suriel, Tomimiel, Sartamiel, Ariel, Betuliel, Masniel, Acrabiel, Chesetiel, Gediel, Deliel, Dagymiel. And if we call them from the latin words, Ariel, Tauriel, Geminiel, Cancriel, Leoniel, Virginiel, Libriel, Scorpiel, Sagittariel, Capriel, Aquariel, Pisciel; and from the Planets, Saturniel, Ioviel, Martiel, Soliah, Veneriel, Mercuriel, Lunael, or Lunaiah. Now because (as we said before) all spirits, as well good as bad, seek for a union with man, which oftentimes in some sort they obtain, we read that some men are called Gods, and angels, and Divels. So the names of them which are endowed with any singular excellency of vertue, or with some desperate wickedness have departed this life, have obtained a place amongst the names of good and bad Demons, and are reckoned amongst them, whether we shall think that the souls of those men or the Genii whether good or bad are signified. So we read in Esdras that the name of the Archangel Ieremiel was from Ieremiah  the Prophet. So Zachariel from Zacharia; and Uriel from Uriah the Prophet, whom Ioachim  slue. In like manner Samuel, Ezekiel, Daniel, were the names of Angels as well as Prophets. Phaniel is the name of an Angel, and of the place where Jacob wrestled all night. Ariel is the name of an angel, and is the same as the Lion of God; sometimes also it is the name of an evil Demon, and of a City which is thence called Ariopolis, where the Idol Ariel was worshipped. We finde also in sacred writ that many names of evil Demons had their rise from most wicked men, or from the habitations of wicked men; as the name Astaroth which is the name of an evill Demon, was formerly the name of the City of Og King of Basan, in which dwelt giants; in like manner Astaroth was formerly the City of the Amorrhei; Raphaim a valley, and Ieramiel the country of the Allophyli; and also they were the names of Idols, and evill Demons; as Remma was the statue of the Idol of Damascus; Chamos the Idol of Moab; Melchim the Idol of the Amontae; Bel the Idol of Babylonians; Adramelech the Idol of the Assirians; Dagon the Idol of the Allophyli. And Philo makes mention of seven golden Statues which the Amorrhei had, which they called the holy Nymphs, which being called upon did shew to the Amorrhei every hour their works; and the names of them were the names of women, which were the wives of seven wicked men, which consecrated them after the floud, viz Chanaan, Phut, Selath, Nebroth, Abirion, Elath, Desuat, and there were put upon them pretious  stones, engraven, and consecrated, one of which had a vertue to restore sight to the blind; neither could any fire burn these stones; and the books were consecrated with stones, which in like manner could not be burnt with fire, nor cut with yron, nor obliterated with water, until the angel of the Lord took them, and buried them in the bottome of the sea. Moreover we know that Nimbroth, Chodorlaomor, Balach, Amalech, names of Kings, have obtained the order of evill spirits. Also giants are called with divels  after a common name, Enakim ענקים because they did not partake of the image of God i.e. they have not received the splendor of the spiritual intellect, but their reason hath multiplied evil kinds of frauds & sins. Therefore they we not reckoned of the species of man (as saith Rabbi Moses the Egyptian) but of the species of beasts, and divels, only that they have the shape of a man, and such (he saith) were the sons of Adam, which were predecessors to Seth after Abel; of which the wise men of the Hebrews said, that Adam begat Tochot תוכות i.e. divels. But after that he had found favor in the eyes of God, he begot Seth after his own image, and likeness, i.e. who according to the image of God obtained a human perfection, which he that hath not, is not reckoned of the species of man, by reason of the pravities which are the cause of all evils and mischief. It is also (as saith Porphyry) the opinion of Magicians, that evill souls are turned into the nature of Divels, and become as pernicious as they; which Christ confirmed, when he spake concerning Judas Iscariot: Have not I chosen twelve, and one of you is a divel? which divels therefore they call adventitious, because of mens souls, they are become Divels. Whence the names of wicked men and divels are the same, whether by these we call their souls, or evil Genii, which have taken upon them the names of wicked men, as if it were their persons. Also Behemoth, and the Leviathan signifie beasts, and divels. By these examples he that is inquisitive shall finde out the names of good, as well as of evil spirits.
We must now speak of the Characters and Seals of spirits. Characters therefore are nothing else then certain unknowable letters and writings, preserving the secrets of the Gods, and names of spirits from the use and reading of prophane  men, which the Ancients called Hyeroglyphicall, or sacred letters, because devoted to the secrets of the Gods only. For they did account it unlawfull to write the mysteries of the God  with those Characters with which profane and vulgar things were wrote. Whence Porphyry saith, that the Ancients were willing to conceal God, and divine vertues by sensible figures, and by those things which were visible, yet signifying invisible things, as being willing to deliver great mysteries in sacred letters, and explain them in certain Symbolical figures; as when they dedicated all round things to the World, the Sun, the Moon, hope, and fortune, a circle to the heaven, and parts of a circle to the Moon, Pyranide  and Obelisks to the fire, and Olympian Gods; a Cylinder to the Sun and Earth; a mans Yard  to generation and Juno, to whom also by reason of the feminine sex the triangular figure. Wherefore this kind of Characters hath another root beside the pleasure, and authority of the institutor, of him I say, who received power of instituting, and consecrating these kind of letters, such as were many Prelates amongst divers Nations, and Sects of Religions, whose institutions came not to us, by reason that few of them were delivered by the Authors scatteringly, and by fragments. Of this kind of character therefore are those which Peter Apponus  notes, as delivered by Honorius of Thebes, the figures whereof are such, being related to our Alphabet.
Amongst the Hebrews I finde more fashions of Characters, whereof one is most ancient, viz an Ancient writing which Moses, and the Prophets used, the form of which is not rashly to be discovered  to any; for those letters which they use at this day, were instituted by Esdras. There is also amongst them a writing which they call Celestiall, because they shew it placed and figured amongst the Stars, no otherwise then the other Astrologers produce images of signs from the lineaments of Stars. There is also a writing which they call Malachim, or Melachim, i.e. of Angels, or Regal; there is also another, which they call the passing through the River, and the Characters and figures of all these are such.
Moreover of those signs and Characters Porphyrie  speaks in his book De Responsis, saying that they did signifie the gods themselves, by whom they did enjoy things, and by which they were called forth, and which were to be offered to them: And did show the figures of the images what they should be; and that he perceived these things concerning the Oracle of Proserpina. He saith moreover that Hecate commanded how images should be constituted to her, and that they were to be cirrounded  with wormwood, and that domestick mice were to be painted, & the finest ornaments such as were most pleasing to her, and so many mice as her forms were to be taken; then blood, myrrhe, storax, and other things were to he burnt: Which things if they were done, she would appear, and answer the worker thereof by dreams. But we shall here under-write the Oracle of Hecate; for thus she speaks,
Such were in old times the secret mysteries of the gods and Demons of the Gentils, by which they did perswade  themselves to be compelled, detained, and hound by men. Hence Jamblicus, and Porphyrie  teach that he that calls upon sacred Demons must observe them, with their proper honour, and to distribute to each what is convenient to every one, as thanks, oblations, gifts, sacrifices, with words, Characters sutable  to their conditions, and most like unto them; or else he should never obtain the presence of the Deities, and Demons, and the desired effect; Moreover if they were called upon, yet they shall be constrained to hurt them especially who did it neglegently.
By the efficacy of Religion the presence of spirits doth dispose the effect, neither can any work of wonderfull efficacy in Religion be done, unless some good spirit the ruler and finisher of the work be there present. Now good spirits, if they may be divers wayes called up, yet can by no bonds, or vary hardly be allayed by us, but we must by some sacred things beseech them, as we read in Apuleius, by the Celestiall Stars, by the infernall dieties, by the naturall elements, by the silence of the night, by the increase of the Country of Nilus, by the secrets of Memphis and elsewhere is Porphyrie: Thou who art risen out of the mud, who sittest in thy place, who sailest in ships, who every hour dost change thy shape, and art changed in each sign of the Zodiack. By these, and such like, Symbolicall orations and hymnes, because they are signes of Divine vertues, spirits did sometimes apply themselves to humane uses: not as being compelled by any kind of necessity, but of their own accord, and by a kind of custom, did, being overcome by the prayers of them that called on them, more easily yeeld: whence Porphyrie in his book De Responsis Hecate saith,
Also the divining of sutable things works so with mans mind, that good spirits do assist us willingly, and communicate their power and vertue to us, dayly  helping us with illuminations, inspirations, oracles, prophecyings, dreams, miracles, prodigies, divinations, and auguries, and working upon and acting upon our spirits, as images like to them, by framing them by their influences, and making them most like to themselves even so far, as that oftentimes our spirit doth as surely work wonderfull things as the Celestial spirits are wont to do. But evil spirits are overcome by us through the assistance of the good, especially when the petitioner is very pious and devout, and sings forth sacred words, and a horrible speech, as by conjuring the Divine power by the venerable names, and signs of supernaturall powers, by miracles, by Sacraments, by sacred mysteries, and such like; which conjurations, or adurations, in as much as they are done by the name and power of Religion, and Divine vertue, those evil spirits are afraid of; whence also oftentimes prophane men do bind or allay by such kinde of sacred conjurations, evil spirits not enduring such things, whence Cyprian in his book Quod Idola Dii non sint, saith; that spirits being adjured by the true God to presently yeeld to us, and confesse, and are forced to go out of possessed bodies, and either presently leap out, or by degrees vanish, according as the faith of the Patient is helping, or grace of the swearer aspires. And Athanasius in his book De Variis Questionibus saith that there is no word more terrible and more destructive to the power of Devils then the beginning of the. Psalm, Arise O God, and let thine enemies be scattered; For assoon as that word is spoken, the devill vanisheth away howling. And Origen against Celsus saith, that the naming the name Jesus hath oftentimes cast many devils as well out of the souls of men as their bodies, and hath exercised much power in them out of whom the devils were cast. Also we do oftentimes with threats and revilings bind or repell evil spirits, especially the lesser, as Haggs, Incubi, and such like, as we read in Lucan concerning that witch saying,
And in Philostratus we read, when Apollonius and his companions were travelling in a bright Moon-shining night, that the Phantasme of a Hagge met them, and some times changed it self into this shape, & some times into that, and some times vanished out of their sight. Now assoon as Apollonius knew what it was, grievously reviling it advised his companions to do the like: for he knew that that was the best remedy against such invasions. His companions did as he advised, and the Phantasme presently with a noise vanished away like a shadow: For so fearfull is this kind of spirits, that they are moved, tremble, and are compelled by a feigned terrour, and false and impossible threats. Whence Chereon the holy scribe saith that these are those things by which especially the spirits are compelled. There is moreover as hath been above said, a certain kind of spirits not so noxious, but most neer to men, so that they are even affected with humane passions, and many of these delight in mans society, and willingly dwell with them: Some of them dote upon women, some upon children, some are delighted in the company of divers domestick and wild animals, some inhabit Woods and Parks, some dwell about fountains and meadows. So the Fairies, and hobgoblins inhabit Champian fields; the Naiades fountains: the Potamides Rivers; the Nymphs marshes, and ponds: the Oreades mountains; the Humedes Meadows; the Dryades and Hamadryades the Woods, which also Satyrs and Sylvani inhabit, the same also take delight in trees and brakes, as do the Naptæ, and Agaptæ in flowers; the Dodonæ in Acorns; the Paleæ and Feniliæ in fodder and the Country. He therefore that will call upon them, may easily doe it in the places where their abode is, by alluring them with sweet fumes, with pleasant sounds, and by such instruments as are made of the guts of certain animals and peculiar wood, adding songs, verses, inchantments sutable  to it, and that which is especially to be observed in this, the singleness of the wit, innocency of the mind, a firm credulity, and constant silence; wherefore they do often meet children, women, and poor and mean men. They are afraid of and flie from men of a constant, bold, and undaunted mind, being no way offensive to good and pure men, but to wicked and impure, noxious. of this kind are hobgoblins, familiars, and ghosts of dead men. Hence Plotinus saith, that the souls of men are sometimes made spirits: and of men well deserving are made familiars which the Greeks call Eudemons, i.e. blessed spirits: but of ill deserving men, hags, and hobgoblins, which the Greeks call Cacodemons, i.e. Evil spirits; But they may be called ghosts when it is uncertain whether they have deserved well or ill. Of these apparitions there are divers examples; such was that which Pliny the Junior makes mention of concerning the house of Athenodorus the Philosopher of Tharsis in which there appeared with a sudden horrible noise the ghost of an old man. And Philostratus tels of the like of a hag of Menippus Lycius the Philosopher turned into a beautifull woman of Corinth, whom Tyaneus Apollonius took to be a hobgoblin; the same at Ephesus, the like in the shape of an old beggar who was the cause of the pestilence, who therefore being by his command stoned, there appeared a mastive  dog, and presently the pestilence ceased. We must know this that whosoever shall intellectually work in evil spirits, shall by the power of good spirits bind them; but he that shall work only worldlily, shall work to himself judgement and damnation.
The bonds by which spirits are bound, besought, or cast out, are three; Some of them are taken from the elementall world, as when we adjure a spirit by any inferiour and naturall things of affinity with or adverse to them, in as much as we would call upon or cast them out, as by flowers, and herbs, by animals, by snow by ice, by hell, by fire, and such like, as these also are oftimes mixed with Divine praises, and blessings, and consecrations, as appears in the song of the three Children, and in the Psalm, Praise ye the Lord from the heavens, and in the consecration and blessing of the Paschal taper. This bond doth work upon the spirits by an apprehensive vertue under the account of love, or hatred, in as much as the spirits are present with or favour, or abhor anything that is naturall or against nature, as these things themselves love or hate one the other. Hence that of Proclus, As the Lion fears a cock, especially a white cock: so doth a spirit appearing in the form of a lion vanish away at the sight of a cock. The second bond is taken from the Celestial world, viz: when we adjure them by the heaven, by Stars, by their motions, rayes, light, beauty, clearness, excellency, fortitude, influence, and wonders, and such like: and this bond works upon spirits by way of admonition, and example. It hath also some Command, especially upon the ministring spirits, and those who are of the lowest orders. The third bond is from the Intellectual and divine world, which is perfected by religion, that is to say, when we swear by the sacraments, by the miracles, by the divine names, by the sacred Seals and other mysteries of Religion; wherefore this bond is the highest of all and the strongest, working upon the spirits by Command and power; But this is to be observed, that as after the universal providence, there is a particular one; and after the universal soul, particular soules; so in the first place we Invocate by the superior bonds, and by the names and powers which rule the things, then by the inferior, and the things themselves; We must know further, that by these bonds not only Spirits, but also all creatures are bound, as Tempests, burnings, flouds, plagues, diseases, force of armes, and every animal, by assuming them, either by the manner of Adjuration, or by the way of deprecation or benediction, as in the charming of Serpents, besides the naturall and celestial, by rehearsing out of the mysteries and Religion, the curse of the Serpent in terrestrial Paradise, the lifting up of the Serpent in the wilderness; moreover by assuming that verse of the Psalm. Thou shalt walk upon the Aspe and the Basiliske, and shalt tread upon the Lion and Dragon: Superstition also very much prevaileth in these, by the translating of some Sacramental rites to that which we Intend to bind or hinder, as, of Excommunication, burial or exequies for the driving away of diseases, Serpents, Mice or Wormes, which thing we read to have bin thus done in divers places, and it is wont to be done even as yet.
After the Quires of the blessed spirits, the Animastical order is the next, which the Hebrew Theologians call Issim, that is, strong and mighty men; the Magicians of the Gentiles, call Heroes and Demi-gods, or  gods half men: whom Fulgentius, an Author not to be contemned, supposeth were so called, either because that for the meanness of their desert they are not judged worthy of Heaven, nor yet are accounted Terresterial for the reverence of Grace; of this kind in old time were Priapus, Hippo, Vertumnus; or because they being eminent in this life for divine vertues, and benefits for mankinde, after this mortal man put off, are translated into the quire of the blessed gods; alwayes providing for mortal men the same vertues and benefits which they long since had in this life: or because they were procreated from the secret seed of the superiors, whom they think were begotten by the mixture of Gods or Angels with men, & therefore obtaining a certain middle nature, so as they are neither Angels nor men: which opinion Lactantius also followeth; and there are even at this time those who have commerce and conjugall mixture with spirits; and all now believe that Merline, a British Prophet, was the son of a Spirit, and born of a virgin: and also they imagined, that Plato the Prince of wisdome was born of a virgin, impregnated by a phantasme of Apollo. And it is delivered in Histories, that certain women of the Gothes (which they call Alrumnæ) eminent both for beauty and ingenuity, long since at Filimire, or (as others say) at Idanthresie, going forth out of the tents of the King of the Gothes, wandred in the desarts  of Scythia in Asia beyond the Marshes of Meotis, and there being Impregnated by Fanni and Satyres, brought forth the first Hunni; more over Psellus is the Author, that Spirits sometimes cast forth seed, from the which certain little creatures arise: Therefore these Heroes have no less power in disposing and ruling these inferior things, than the Gods and angels, and have both their offices and their dignities distributed to them: and therefore to them no otherwise than to the Gods themselves were Temples, Images, Altars, Sacrifices, Vows, and other mysteries of religion dedicated. And their names invocated had divine and magical vertues for the accomplishing of some miracles: which thing Eusebius declareth that many tried by the invocation of the name of Apollonius of Tyana; and more of this kinde we read of, both in the Poets, and also in the Historians and Philosophers, concerning Hercules, Atlas, Aesculapius and the other Heroes of the Gentiles; but these are the follies of the Gentiles; but as concerning our holy Heroes we beleve that they excel in divine power, and that the soul of the Meschihæ doth rule over them (as the Theologians of the Jews also testify) that is Jesus Christ, who by divers of his Saints, as it were by members fitted for this purpose, doth administer and distribute divers gifts of his grace in these inferior parts, and every one of the Saints do enjoy a particular gift of working. Whence they being implored by us with divers prayers and supplications according to the manifold distribution of graces, every one doth most freely bestow their gifts, benefits, and graces on us much more readily, truly, & also more abundantly than the Angelical powers by how much they are nigher to us, and more allyed to our natures, as they who in times past were both men, and suffered humane affections and infirmities; and their names, degrees and offices are more known to us; Therefore out of the number of these almost Infinite, there are twelve chief, viz the twelve Apostles of Christ, who (as the evangelical truth saith) sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel, who in the Revelations are distributed upon twelve foundations, at the twelve gates of the heavenly City, who rule the twelve Signs, and are sealed in the twelve pretious  Stones, and the whole world is distributed to them; but their true names are these; the first שמעון הכפי Symehon Hacephi, this is Peter. The second אלעוזי Alousi, whom we call Andrew. The third יעקבה Jahacobah, this is James the greater. The fourth פוליפוש Polipos, whom we call Philip. The fift ברכיה Barachiah, this is Bartholomew. The sixt יוהנה Johanah, whom we name Iohn. The seventh is תמני Thamni, whom we call Thomas. The eighth is called מדון Medon, for whom we say Matthew. The ninth is יעקב Jahacob, this is James the less. The tenth is חטיפא Catepha, that is Thadeus. The eleventh שׁמאם Samam, who is Simon the Canaanite. The twelfth מתתיה Matattiah, who is called Matthias. After these are the seventy two disciples of Christ, who also themselves do rule so many Quinaries of Heaven, & Tribes, People, Nations and Tongues. After whom is an Innumerable multitude of Saints, who also themselves have received divers Offices, Places, Nations and People into their protection and patronage, whose most apparent miracles at the faithfull prayers of those that Invocate them, we plainly see and confess.
Next after these are the mortall Gods, whom in like manner also we call Heroes, and Terrestrial gods, or Companions of the superiour Gods: viz Kings, Princes, and Priests, by whom this world is governed, and disposed by their Laws, whom therefore as Gods we receive, worship and reverence, because God himself hath suffered his name to be communicated to them, and by a proper denomination hath confirmed it to them, calling them gods, even as he spake to Moses, saying, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh; and elsewhere he hath commanded concerning them, saying, Thou shalt not detract from the gods; and again, if Theft shall lie hid, the Master of the House shall apply himself to the Gods; and the Psalmist saith, The princes of the people were gathered together with the God of Abraham: because that the mighty gods of the Earth are vehemently lifted up; and elsewhere God stood in the counsels of the gods, but in the midst he Judgeth the gods; and a little after, I have said ye are all gods, and sons of the most high; moreover he hath commanded concerning the worshipping and reverencing of them, decreeing tithes and first fruits for them, and giving them the power of the sword, and forbidding any to curse them, and commanding obedience to be yielded to them, though wicked. Hence all Antiquity called their princes gods, and worshipped them as divine powers, as Janus testifieth in Ovid, in his first book of Fasti saying,
And Divine Plato in his third book de Republica appointed that princes both alive and dead should be celebrated with divine honors, which Institution hath ben received amongst all Nations, even from the first age, viz to deify their princes with divine honours, and to consecrate them with eternall memory; Hence they did impose their never dying names on Cities, Provinces, Mountains, Rivers, Lakes, Ilands  and Seas; And dedicated to them with great pomp, Piramides, Colosses, triumphal Arches, Trophies, Statues, Temples, Plays, Feasts; and also called the Heavens, Stars, Dayes and Months by their names. Hence January from Janus, July from Julius, August from Augustus; so dies Mercurii from Mercury Trismegist, Dies Jovis from Jupiter, which custome we read was observed not only by the Aegyptians Greeks and Romans, but also by the extream barbarous people, as Gothes, Danes and Teutones. Hence Saxo Grammaticus being witness, what day the former call Dies Mercurii, these do call Othines  day: what day the former name from Jupiter, these call Thors day, from Othin and Thor in times past Kings of Gotland and Denmark; neither are they for any other reason called Gothes, then that they call in their language their chiefest god Got. Hence also the Dutch are thus called, because they named the god Mars, whom they worshipped, Teutan; by which name the Gaules also called Mercury. Therefore are Kings and Priests (if they be Just) companions of the gods and endowed with the like power. Hence they cure diseases by their touch and word and sometimes command the times and the Heavens, as Virgil sang of Augustus,
And the Scripture testifieth of Joshuah, who fighting in Gibeon, commanded the Sun and Moon, saying, Sun stand still in Gibeon and thou Moon in the Valley of Ajalon; and the Sun and the Moon stood still at his command, neither did the Sun set in the space of one day, untill he had revenged himself of his Enemies, and the Lord obeyed the voyce of man; Also Moses divided the red Sea, and Joshua Jordan, and led the people over dry shod; The like did Alexander the Macedonian, leading forth his Army; Sometimes also they are endowed with a prophetick spirit, as we read of Chaiaphas in the holy Scripture, that he prophesied, for that he was High Priest that year: Seeing therefore it is so that the Lord of the Earth would that Kings and Priests be called gods by communication of name and power, surely we ought also to deserve well of them, and to prefer their Judgments before ours, and simply to obey, supplicate and adore, and worship with all kinde of worship and reverence the most high God in them.
The most abundant God (as Trismegisus saith) hath framed two Images like himself, viz the world and man, that in one of these he might sport himself with certain wonderfull operations: but in the other, that he might enjoy his delights, who, seeing he is one, hath created the world one, seeing that he is infinite, hath created the world round seeing he is eternall, he hath created the world incorruptible and everlasting: seeing he is Immense, he hath created the world the greatest of all things; seeing he is the chiefest life, he hath adorned the world with vitall seeds, begetting all things out of himself; and seeing he is omnipotent, by his will alone, not by any necessity of nature, he hath created the world, not out of any foregoing matter, but out of nothing; and seeing he is the chief goodness, embracing his word, which is the first Idea of all things, with his choicest will, and essentiall love, he hath fabricated this externall world after the example of the Internall, viz Ideall world, sending forth nothing of the essence of the Idea, but created of nothing that which he had from eternity by the Idea: God also created after his Image; for as the world is the Image of God, so man is the Image of the world. Hence some think that it is spoken, that man is ot created simply the Image of God, but after the Image, or the Image of the Image; therefore he is called Microcosme, that is the lesser world; The world is a Rationall creature, Immortall; man in like manner is rationall but mortal, that is, dissolvable; for (as Hermes saith) seeing the world it self is immortall, it is Impossible that any part of it can perish. Therefore to dye, is a vain name, and even as Vacuum is no where, so also Death; Therefore we say a man dieth, when his Soul and body are separated, not that anything of them perisheth or is turned into nothing. Notwithstanding the true Image of God is his word. The wisdome, life, light and Truth existing by himself, of which Image mans soul is the Image, in regard of which we are said to be made after the Image of God, not after the Image of the world, or of the creatures; for as God cannot be touched, nor perceived by the ears, nor seen with the eyes; so the soul of man can neither bee seen, heard nor touched. And as God himself is infinite, and cannot be compelled by any, so also the minde of man is free, and cannot be enforced or bounded. Further, as God comprehendeth this whole world, and whatsoever is in it in his minde alone; so mans minde comprehendeth it even in thought; and that which is peculiar to him alone with God, as God moveth and governeth all this world by his beck alone, so mans minde ruleth and governeth his body. Therefore it was necessary, that the minde of man thus sealed by the word of God, should put on also the corporeall man, after the most compleat example of the world: Therefore man is called the other world, and the other Image of God, because he hath in himself All that is contained in the greater world, so that there remaineth nothing which is not found even truly and really in man himself, and all these things do perform the same duties in him, as in the great world: There are in him the four Elements, with the most true properties of their nature, and in him an ethereal body, the Chariot of the soul in proportion corresponding to the Heaven: There are in him the vegetative life of Plants, the senses of animals, of celestial spirits, the Angelical reason, and the Divine understanding, and the true conjunction, and divine possession of all these things flowing together into one. Hence in sacred Letters man is called every creature, and not onely man being made another world doth comprehend all the parts thereof in himself, but also doth receive and contain even God himself. Hence Xystus the Pythagorean, saith, that the soul of man is the temple of God: which thing Paul also more clearly expressed, saying, ye art the Temple of God; & the same the sacred Scripture testifieth in many places: Therefore man is the most express Image of God, seing man conteineth in himself all things which are in God: but God by a certain eminency conteineth all things through his power, & simply, as the cause and beginning of all things; but he hath given this power to man, that he should in like manner contein all things, but by a certain act & composition, as the knot, tye, and bond of all things: Therefore man only rejoyceth  in this honor, that he hath similitude with all, operation with all, and conversation with all: He Symbolizeth with the matter in a proper subject; with the Elements in a fourfold body; with Plants in a vegetative vertue; with animals in a sensitive faculty; with the Heavens in an Etherial spirit, and influx of the superior parts on the inferiour: with the Angels in understanding and wisdome; with God, in conteining all things: He is preserved with God, and the Intelligences, by faith and wisdome: with the heavens and heavenly things, by reason and discouse: with all Inferiour things, by sense and Dominion: and acteth with all, and hath power on all, even on God himself, by knowing and loving him; and as God knoweth all things, so also man can know all things Intelligible, seeing he hath for an adequate Object, Ens in general, or (as others say) Truth itself; neither is there any thing found in man, nor any disposition, in which something of divinity may not shine forth; neither is there any thing in God, which may not also he represented in man: Whosoever therefore shall know himself, shall know all things in himself; especially he shall know God, according to whose Image he was made; he shall know the world, the resemblance of which he beareth; he shall know all creatures, with which he Symbolizeth; and what comfort he can have and obtain, from Stones, Plants, Animals, Elements, Heavens, from Spirits, Angels, and every thing, and how all things may be fitted for all things, in their time, place, order, measure, proportion and Harmony, and can draw and bring to himself, even as a Loadstone Iron; And Geber in his summ of Alchimy  teacheth, that no man can come to the perfection of this art, who shall not know the principles of it in himself; but by how much the more every one shall know himself, by so much he obtaineth the greater power of attracting it, and by so much operateth greater and more wonderfull things, and will ascend to so great perfection, that he is made the Son of God, and is transformed into that Image which is God, and is united with him, which is not graunted to Angels, the world, or any creature, but to man only, viz to have power to be made the Son of God, and to be united to him: but man being united to God, all things which are in man, are united, especially his minde, then his spirits and animal powers, and vegetative faculty, and the Elements are to the matter, drawing with it self even the body, whose form it hath been, leading it forth into a better condition, and an heavenly nature, even untill it be glorified into Immortality. And this which we have spoken is the peculiar gift of man, to whom this dignity of the divine image is proper, and common to no other creature: But there are some Theologians, who make those powers of mans memory, understanding, will, the image of the Divine trinity; and there are  who going further, do place this image not only in these three faculties which they call first acts, but also in the second acts; And as the memory representeth the father, the understanding the son, the will the Holy Ghost; So also the word produced from our understanding, and love flowing from our will, and the understanding it self having a present object and producing it, do set forth the son, spirit and father; and the more mysterious Theologians teach that moreover all our members do represent something in God whose image they bear; and that even in our passions we represent God, but by a certain Analogy: for in the holy word we read of the wrath, fury, repentance, complacency, love, hatred, pleasure, delectation, delight, indignation of God, and such like, and we have spoken something of the members of God, which may be congruent here; Also Mercurius Trismegistus confessing the divine Trinity, describeth it understanding, life and brightness, which elsewhere he calleth the word, the minde and the spirit, and saith that man made after the image of God doth represent the same Trinity; for there is in him an understanding minde, a verifying word, and a spirit, as it were a Divine brightness diffusing it self on every side, replenishing all things, moving and knitting them together: but this is not to be understood of the naturall spirit which is the middle by the which the soul is united with the flesh and the body, by the which the body liveth and acteth, and one member worketh on another, of the which spirit we we have spoken in the first book. But we here speak of the naturall spirit, which yet in some sort is also corporeall, notwithstanding it hath not a grosse body, tangible and visible, but a most subtile body and easie to be united with the mind viz that superiour and Divine one which is in us; neither let anyone wonder, if we say that the rationall soul is that spirit, and a corporeall thing, or that it either hath or favoureth something of corporiety while it is in the body and useth it as an instrument, if so be that ye shall understand, what, amongst the Platonists, that Etheriall body of the soul, and chariot of the same may be; therefore Plotine  and all the Platonists, after Trismegist, in like manner, place three things in man, which they call the Supreme, lowest and middle: The Supreme is that Divine thing which they call the mind, or superiour portion, or illuminated intellect. Moses in Genesis calleth it the breath of life, viz breath from God or his spirit inspired into us; The lowest is the Sensitive soul which they also call an Image: Paul the Apostle nameth it the Animall man. The middle is the reasonable spirit knitting and tying together both extreams, viz the Animal soul with the mind favouring of the nature of both extreams: yet it differeth from that Supream  which is called the illuminated intellect, the mind, light, and supream portion; it differeth also from the Animall soul, from the which, the Apostle teacheth us, that we ought to separate it, by the power of the word of God, saying, the Word of God is lively and powerfull, more penetrating then a two edged sword, peircing  even to the dividing of the soul and spirit: for as that supream portion never sinneth, never consenteth to evil, and alwayes resisteth errour  and exhorteth to the best things; so that inferior portion and Animall soul is alwayes overwhelmed in evil, in sin and concupiscence, and draweth to the worst things, of the which Paul saith, I see another Law in my members, leading me captive to the law of sin: The Minde therefore the supream  portion is never damned; but when its companions are to be punished, goeth away unhurt into its Originall: But the spirit, which by Plotinus is called the reasonable soul, seeing it is by its nature, free, and can according to his pleasure adhere to either of them, if it constantly adhere to the superiour portion, is at length united and beautified with it, untill it be assumed into God: if it adhere unto the inferior soul, it is depraved, and becomes vitious, untill it be made a wicked spirit. But thus much concerning the mind and spirit: now let us see concerning the speech or word. Mercurius thinketh this of the same value for immortality: for speech or word is that without which nothing is done or can be done; for it is the expression of the expressor and of the thing expressed; and the speaking of the speaker, and that which speaketh, is speech or word: and the conception of the conceiver and that which conceiveth, is the word: and the writing of the writer and that which writeth, is the word: and the forming of the former and that which formeth, is the word; and the creation of the Creator, and that which createth, is the word: and the doing of the doer, and that which is done is the word: and the knowledge of him that knoweth and the thing knowen is the word: and every thing that can be spoken is but a word, and its called equality: for it carrieth it self equally towards all; seeing that it is not one thing more then another, equally bestowing on all, that they may be, that which they are, neither more nor lesse; and it self being sensible, doth make it self and all things sensible, as light maketh it self & all things visible; therefore the world is called by Mercurius the bright son of the mind; for the conception by the which the mind conceived it self, is the intrinsecall word generated from the mind viz the knowledge of it self: But the extrinsecall and vocall word, is the of-spring  and manifestation of that word, and a spirit proceeding out of the mouth with sound and voice, signifying something: but every voice of ours, speech and word unlesse it be formed by the voice of God, is mingled with the air and vanisheth; but the spirit and word of the Lord remaineth, life and sense accompanying it. Therefore all our speech, words, spirit and voice have no power in Magick, unless they be formed by the divine word: & Aristotle himself in his Meteors, and in the end of his Ethicks confesseth, that there is not any vertue either natural or morall, unless through God; & in his secret tenents, he affirmeth that our understanding being good and sound can do very much on the secrets of nature if so be that the influence of the Divine power be present, otherwise nothing at all: So also our words can do very many miracles, if they be formed by the word of God, in which also our universall generation is perfected, as Isay saith, by thy countenance O Lord, we have conceived, as women rightly conceive by the countenance of their husbands, and have brought forth spirit. Hither in some sort belongeth that which is delivered by the Gymnosophists of the Indians, viz that Budda a prince of this opinion, brought forth a virgin out of his side; and amongst the Mahumetans  there is a constant opinion, that many, whom in their tongues they call Nefesohli, are born by a certain occult manner of Divine dispensation without carnall copulation, whose life is therefore wonderfull and impassible and as it were Angelical and all together supernaturall; but these triffles we leave; only the King Messiah, the word of the father, made flesh, Christ Jesus hath revealed this secret, and will further manifest it at a certain fulness of time: therefore a mind very like to himself (as Lazarillus sang in Crater of Hermes.)
Who are not born of the will of flesh, or of man, or of a menstruous woman, but of God: but it is an universall generation in which the Son is like the Father in all manner of similitude, and in the which, that which is begot is the same in specie with the begetter; and this is the power of the word formed by the mind, and received into a subject rightly disposed, as seed into the matrix for the generation; but I say disposed & rightly received; because that all are not partakers of the word after the same manner, but others otherwise; and these are the most hidden secrets of nature which ought not to be further published.
The soul of man is a certain divine Light, created after the image of the word, the cause of causes and first example, and the substance of God, figured by a seal whose Character is the eternall Word; also the soul of man is a certain divine substance, individuall and wholly present in every part of the body, so produced by an incorporeall Author, that it dependeth by the power of the Agent only, not by the bosome of the matter: The soul is a substantiall number, uniform, conversive unto it self, and rationall, very far excelling all bodies and materiall things; the partition of which is not according to the matter, nor proceeding from inferiour and grosser things, but from the efficient cause: For it is not a quantitative number, but removed from all corporeall Laws, whence it is not divided nor multiplyed by parts. Therefore the soul of man is a certain divine substance, flowing from a divine fountain, carrying along with it self number: not that divine one by the which the creator hath disposed all things, but a rational number by the which seeing it hath a proportion to all things, it can understand all things. Therefore mans soul being such, according to the opinion of the Platonists, immediately proceeding from God, is joynod by competent means to this grosser body; whence first of all in its descent, it is involved in a Celestiall and aeriall body, which they call the celestiall vehicle of the soul, others the chariot of the soul: Through this middle thing, by the command of God who is the center of the world, it is first infused into the middle point of the heart, which is the center of mans body, and from thence it is diffused through all the parts and members of his body, when it joyneth his chariot to the naturall heat, being a spirit generated from the heart by heat; by this it plungeth it self into the humours, by the which it inhereth in all the members, and to all these is made equally the nighest, although it be diffused through one to another; even as the heat of fire adhereth most nigh to the air and water, although it be transferred by the air to the water; thus it is manifest, how the immortal soul, by an immortall body, viz an Etheriall vehicle, is included in a grosse and mortall body, but when by a disease or some mischief, these midle  things are dissolved or fail, then the soul it self by these middle things recollecteth it self, and floweth back into the heart which was the first receptacle of the soul: but the spirit of the heart failing, and heat being extinct, it leaveth him, and man dieth, and the soul flieth away with this Celestial vehicle, and the Genius his keeper and the Demon follow it being gone forth, and carry it to the Judge, where sentence being pronounced, God quietly leadeth forth the good souls to glory: the evill the fierce devill draggeth to punishment.
By the seven Planets as it were by instruments, all powers are diffused into man from the Supream fountain of good: by Saturn a sublime contemplation & profound understanding, solidity of judgement, firm speculation, stability and an immoveable resolution: by Jupiter, an unshaken prudence, temperance, benignity, piety, modesty, Justice, Faith, Grace, Religion, equity, clemency, royalty; by Mars, truth; not to be terrified, constant courage and fortitude, a fervent desire of animosity, the power of acting and the practice, and an inconvertible vehemency of the mind. By the Sun, nobility of mind, perspicuity of imagination, the nature of knowledge and opinion, maturity, counsell, zeal, light of justice, reason and judgement distinguishing right from wrong, purging light from the darkness of ignorance, the glory of truth found out, and charity the Queen of all vertues: by Venus, a fervent love, most sweet hope, the motion of desire, order, concupiscence, beauty, sweetness, desire of encreasing and propagation of it self; by Mercury a piercing faith and belief, clear reasoning, the vigour of interpreting and pronouncing, gravity of speech, acuteness of wit, discourse of reason, and the swift motions of the senses: by the Moon a peace making consonancy, fecundity, the power of generation and of growing greater, of increasing and decreasing, and a moderate temperance, and faith which being conversant in manifest and occult things yeeldeth direction to all; also motion to the tilling of the earth for the manner of life and giving growth to it-self and others; but these influences are principally drawn from those seven intelligences, who stand before the face of God, who dispose the soul the seat of these vertues: but the planets dispose the body only, giving a tractable complexion proportioned and tempered for every good thing, and they are as it were the instruments of the Intelligences; but God as the primary cause doth yeeld both the influence & increase to all. They therefore who have sought out the vertues and divers dispositions of the soul, do judge, that they obtain diverse natures, by reason of the diversity of means, by the which they have a passage to us, and that these souls are not joyned with the bodies themselves unless they be proportioned by these Stars; So in a body brought to a temperament by Jupiter, they think that the soul infused is temperated by the power and intelligence of Jupiter, and so of the rest According to which disposition if the soul work well in this body, when its purged and expiated, it returneth to that divine power and Mansion from whence it descended. Furthermore, from the Angelicall orders man is strengthened with wonderfull vertues, viz from the angels, that he may be a messenger of the divine will and an interpreter of the mind of God; from the Archangels, that he may rule over all beasts of the field, fish of the sea, and fowls of the air, over the which command is given him; from the Principalities, that all things may be subdued to him, he comprehending the powers of all, and drawing all powers to himself by a certain force most secret and supercelestiall; From the Vertues, it receiveth power, by the which it constantly fighting is strengthened against the enemies of truth, for the reward of which we run a race in this life; from the powers against the enemies of this earthly Tabernacle: from the Dominations, it hath help by the which we can subject any domestick enemy we carry along with us, and can obtain our desired end. From the Thrones, we are knit together, and being collected into our selves, we fix our memory on those eternall visions: From the Cherubins, is light of mind, power of wisdom, very high phantasies and figures, by the which we are able to contemplate even the divine things; From the Seraphins, that by the perfect flame of love we may at length inhere in them: These are the degrees, these the ladders, by the which men easily ascend to all kinds of powers by a certain naturall connexion and chariot, according to the diverse disposition of body and mind, and by the favour of the Stars, in the disposing of the body, and of the Intelligences ruling them, the nature of which the soul in its descense  putteth on, even as light the colour of the glasse, through which it passeth; the supream  power of the Creator favouring, from whom is all good, and without which no good nor perfect thing can be obtained; Therefore all those do labour in vain, who trusting only on the course of nature, and the power and favour of inferiour things, do think to attain to divine things; and those who faining to have a foot in the heavens, do endeavour to receive those things from the favour of the heavens, which ought to be received from God alone; for these inferiors, I mean animals, Herbs, stones, metals, their power subservient to the heaven; but the heaven from the Intelligences; but these from God, in whom all things pre-exist in the greatest power; as in man the little world there is not a member which hath not correspondence with some element, plant, intelligence, and with some measure and numeration in the Archetype: as we have shewen before.
When therefore the perversity of the subject receiveth the Influences of the perverse, or its debility cannot endure the efficacy of the superiors, then by the Influence of the heavens thus received into a matter full of discords, doth result something dissonant, deformed and evill; yet the celestiall powers alwaies remain good, which while they exist in themselves, and from the giver of light have their Influence by the holy Intelligences and the heavens, even till they shall come to the Moon, their Influence is good, as it were in the first degree; but then when it is received in a viler subject, it also is vilified; then also in respect of the different nature of the recipient it is received after diverse manners, and by the qualities disagreeing in the same subject amongst themselves, it also is varied and patiently suffreth in the subject; whence from all comprehended in the subject, at length some other thing doth result than the Superiors send down; therefore the hurtfull quality in these Inferiors, is far different from the influx of the heavens; and therefore as the distemper of the bleareyed, is not to be imputed to the light, nor burnings to the fire, nor wounds to the sword, nor fetters and Prisons to the Judge, but to the evill disposed and offenders; so neither is the fault of wicked ones to be cast on the celestial Influences: Therefore we being well disposed, the celestial influences cooperate all things for good; but being evill disposed, and having for our sins, that divine good, which was in us, departed from us, all things work for evill: therefore the cause of all our evills is sinne, which is the disorder and distemper of our soul; from the which then, thus evilly governing, or falling down or declining from that which the celestial influences require, all things rebel, and are distempered for our destruction: then in mans body, otherwise most temperate and composed with most sweet Harmony, the distemper of the Elements beginneth, evill humors  arise: and even the good being disordered and severed from one another, by a certain vicissitude both vex and torment the body: then is a most vehement dissonance perceived, either by superfluity or diminution, or some intrinsecal accident, or by superfluous meat, whence superfluous humors are generated, and by the same cause infirmities follow; yea the animal spirits, the bridle being broken, do fall to contention. Then the celestial influences, otherwise of themselves good, are made hurtfull to us, even as the light of the sun to eyes ill disposed: Then Saturn darteth down anguish, tediousnes, melancholy, madnes, sadnes, obstinacy, rigidnes, blasphemy, desperation, lying, Apparitions, affrightments, walkings of the dead, stirrings of Divels: Jupiter then sendeth down covetousnes, evil occasions to get wealth, and tyranny: Mars, furious wrath, prophane  arrogancy, violent boldness, fierce stubbornnes: but the Sun imperious pride, and insatiable ambition: Venus, the deceits of concupiscence, lascivious loves and filthy lusts: Mercury deceits, cousenages, lyes, subtile desires of evill, propensity to sin; The Moon the inconstant progress of all things, and whatsoever is contrary to mans nature: and by this means man himself by reason of his unlikeness with the heavenly things receiveth hurt, whence he ought to reap benefit: by reason of the same dissonancy with the heavenly things (as Proclus saith) men also are subjected even to wicked spirits who as the officers of God do discharge themselves in punishing them: Then do they suffer grievances by evill spirits, even untill they are again expiated, by due purgations, and man returneth to a divine nature: therefore an excellent Magitian  can prohibite many mischifes  about to fall on him from the disposition of the Stars, when he foreknoweth their nature by preventing, taking heed, and defending, least they should meet him, and least an ill disposed subject, as we have said, should receive hurt whence it ought to reap benefit.
By no small experience it is found that a certain power of ruling and predominating is implanted in man by nature; for (Pliny testifieth) that an Elephant meeting a man wandring in a desart, is reported to shew himself gentle and courteous, and to shew the way to him: and the same creature also is said, before he seeth man, to tremble, to stand still, to look about, to quake at the steps of man, for fear of treachery: in like manner the Tiger, the most fierce of all beasts, at the sight of man doth remove her yong  ones; and more of this kinde we read in divers authors, who have writ great volumes of creatures; but from whence do these animals know, that man is to be feared, whom they never saw: and if they have seen and known, whence do they fear him, seeing they do excell him in greatnes, force and swiftnes? what is this nature of man, striking this terror on wild beasts? all the Historiographers of animals do finde out and grant this, but have left to others to teach and prove it. Concerning this therefore Apollonius Tyaneus (as we read in Philostratus) seeing a child leading a huge Elephant, answerind Damus asking him, whence came that obedience of so huge a Creature to the little child: That it was from a certain active terror, implanted in man by his creator, which inferiour creatures and all animals perceiving do fear and reverence man, which is as it were a terrifying Character, and a seal of God imprinted on man, by the which every thing is subject to him, and acknowledges him superior, whither it be servant or animal. For otherwise neither could a child rule his herd and Elephants, neither could a King terrify his people, nor the Judge the guilty. Therefore this Character is imprinted on man from the divine Idea which the Cabalists of the Hebrew call Pahad פחד and the left hand, or sword, of God: furthermore man hath not only a seal by which he is feared, but also by the which he is beloved, the Idea of which in the divine numerations is called Hesed חסד which signifieth Clemency, & the right hand and Scepter of God: from these divine numerations, by the intelligences and Stars, Seals and Characters are imprinted on us to every one according to his capacity and purity: which signes the first man created, without doubt did possess in all integrity and fulness, when all creatures being attracted by secret gentlenes, and subjected by terror, came to him as to their lord, that he might give them names: but after the sin of prevarication he fell from that dignity with all his posterity; yet that Character is not all together extinct in us. But by how much every one is laden with sin, by so much he is farther off from these divine Characters and receiveth less of them; and whence he ought to receive frendship  and reverence, he falleth into the slavery and terror of others, both of animals and also men and devils: which Cain perceiving feared, saying to God, every one who findeth me, will kill me; for he feared beasts and devils, not only men, who were very few; but in the old times, many men who lived innocently, a very good life, as yet did enjoy that obedience and power, as Sampson, David and Daniel over the Lions, Elisha over the Bear, Paul over the Viper; and many Anchorites lived in the deserts, in Caves and Dens of wild beasts, not fearing, nor receiving any hurt; for as by sin that divine Character is obscured, so sin being purged and expiated, it again more and more shineth forth.
In generall it is appointed for all men once to dye; death is fatall to all; but one is naturall, another violent, another voluntarily received, another inflicted by humane  lawes for offences, or by God for sin, that they seem not to have rendred a due to nature, but a punishment for sins; which (as the Hebrew Masters saith) God remitteth to none; Whence the Assembly delivered to Ezechiah, that after the house of the Sanctuary was pulled down, although there remained not any order of judiciary execution, yet there should he a four-fold kind of punishment by the which they might he condemned, that no man guilty of death should escape without retaliation; for he which had deserved to he stoned to death, was, God dispensing, either cast down headlong from the house, or trodden in peeces  by wild beasts, or overwhelmed by ruine or fall; but he which had deserved to be burned, was either consumed by burnings, or finished he life either by venemous  bitings, or stings of a serpent, or by poyson; but he which should dye  by the sword, was killed either by the violence of the jurisdiction, or by the tumult of the people or faction, or by the treachery of thieves; he that ought to be hanged, was suffocated either in the waters, or extinguished by some other strangling punishment; and by the ground of this doctrine, that great Origen supposed the Gospel of Christ to be declared, He who useth the sword shall perrish  by sword. Moreover the Ethnick Philosophers pronounced that retaliation of this kinde is Adrastia, viz an inevitable power of divine laws, by the which in courses to come, is recompensed to every one according to the reason and merits of his former life; so as he who unjustly ruled in the former life, in the other life should relapse into a servile state; he which hath polluted his hands with blood, should be compelled to undergo retaliation; he that lived a brutish life, should be precipitated and revolved into a brutish body; of these things Plotinus writeth in his book of the proper Genius of every one; saying, whosoever have kept humane propriety, do again arise men: but whosoever have used sense only, do return brute animals: yet so, as those who use sense especially together with wrath, do arise wild beasts; but whosoever use sense by concupisence and pleasure, do return lecherous and gluttenous  beasts: but if they shall live, not by sense together with them, so much as by the degeneration of sense, plants grow up again with them; for the vitals only, or chiefly, are living, & all their care was that they might be turned into plants. But they which have lived being too much allured by musick, not being depraved in other things, are born again musical animals; and they which have raigned  without reason, become Eagles, unles they have been tainted with any wickedness. But he which hath lived civilly and vertuously, returnes a man. And Solomon himself in the Proverbs calls man sometimes a Lion, Tiger, Bear, a Boare. Sometimes a Hare, a hunting dog, a Cony; sometimes a Pismire, a Hedghog, a Serpent, a Spider; sometimes an Eagle, a Stork, a Cock, or any other bird, and many such as these. But the Cabalists of the Hebrews do not admit that souls are turned into brutes: Yet they do not deny but that they that have wholly lost their reason, shall in an other life be left to a brutish affection and imagination: they assert also that souls are revolved hither thrice, and no more; because this number seems sufficiently to suffice for the purgation of sins, according to that of Job, He hath delivered my soul that it should not proceed to death, but should live, and see the light. Behold all these things doth God work three times through each, that he might reduce their souls from corruption, and illuminate them with the light of the living. But now let us see what the Ancients opinion is concerning the dead. When man dies, his body returnes into the earth, from which it was taken: the spirit returnes to the heavens, from whence it descended, as saith the Preacher, The body returnes to the earth from whence it was, & the spirit returnes to God that gave it; which Lucretius hath expressed in these verses;
The flesh being forsaken, & the body being defunct of life, is called a dead Carkass; Which as say the divines of the Hebrews, is left in the power of the Demon Zazel, of whom it is said in the Scripture, Thou shalt eat dust all thy daies; and elswhere, The dust of the earth is his bread. Now man was created of the dust of the earth, whence also that Demon is called the Lord of flesh, and blood, whilest the body is not expiated and sanctified with due solemnities. Hence not without cause the Ancients ordained expiations of Carkasses, that that which was unclean might be sprinkled with holy water, perfumed with incense, be conjured with sacred orations, have lights set by, as long as it was above ground, and then at length be buried in a holy place. Hence Elpenor in Homer, I beseech thee (saith he) Ulysses, be mindful of mee, and leave mee not unburied; lest being unburied I become an object of the Gods wrath. But the spirit of a man, which is of a sacred nature, and divine offspring, because it is alwaies faultless, becomes uncapable  of any punishment; But the soul if it hath done well, rejoyceth  together with the spirit, and going forth with its Aerial Chariot, passeth freely to the quires of the Heroes, or reacheth heaven, where it enjoys all its senses, and powers, a perpetuall blessed felicity, a perfect knowledge of all things, as also the divine vision, and possession of the kingdom of heaven, and being made partaker of the divine power bestows freely divers gifts upon these inferiors, as if it were an immortal God. But if it hath done ill, the spirit judgeth it, and leaves it to the pleasure of the divel, and the sad soul wanders about Hell without a spirit, like an image, as Dido complaines in Virgil;
Wherefore then this soul being voyde  of an intelligible essence, and being left to the power of a furious phantasy, is ever subjected by the torment of corporeall qualities, knowing that it is by the just judgement of God, for ever deprived of the divine vision (to which it was created) for its sins: the absence of which divine vision, as the Scripture testifies, is the ground of all evils, and the most greivous  punishment of all, which the Scripture calls the pouring down of the wrath of God. This image therefore of the soul enters into the ghost as an Aerial body, with which being covered doth sometimes advise friends, sometimes stir up enemies, as Dido threatens Aeneas in Virgil saying,
For when the soul is separated from the body, the perturbations of the memory and sense remain. The Platonists say, that the souls, especially of them that are slain, stir up enemies, mans indignation not so much doing of it, as the divine Nemesis and Demon foreseeing, and permitting of it. So the spirit of Naboth (as the masters of the Hebrews interpret it) because in the end of its life it went forth with a desire of revenge, was made to execute revenge, the spirit of a lye, and went forth, God permitting it, a lying spirit in the mouth of all the prophets, untill it made Achab go up unto Ramoth-Gilead. And Virgil himself together with the Pythagorians, and Platonists, to whom also our Austin  assents, confesseth that separated souls retain the fresh memory of those things which they did in this life, and their will, whence he sings;
And Agazel in his book De Scientia Divina, and other Arabians, and Mahumatists  which were Philosophers, think that the operations of the soul, being common to the conjoyned  body, impresse upon the soul a Character of use and exercise, which it being separated will use, being strongly impressed to the like operations and passions which were not destroyed in life time. And although the body and organ be corrupted, yet the operation will not cease, but like affections and dispositions will remain. And these souls the ancients call with a common name Manes, whereof those that were in this life innocent, and purifyed by morall vertues, were very happy; And of them as Virgil sings,
Although they departed this life without the justification of faith, and grace, as many Divines think, yet their souls were carryed without any suffering into happy pleasant fields; and as saith Virgil,
Where they enjoy certain wonderfull pleasures, as also sensitive, intellectuall, and revealed knowledge; also perhaps they may be indoctrinated concerning faith, and justification, as those spirits long since to whom Christ preached the Gospel in prison. For as it is certain that none can be saved without the faith of Christ, so it is probable that this faith is preached to many Pagans and Saracens after this life, in those receptacles of souls unto salvation, and that they are kept in those receptacles, as in a common prison, untill the time comes when the great Judge shall examine our actions. To which opinion Lactantius, Ireneus, Clemens, Tertullian, Austin, Ambrose, and many more Christian writers do assent. But those souls which are impure, incontinent, depart wicked, do not enjoy such happy dreams, but wander full of most hideous Phantasmes, and in worser places, enjoying no free knowledge but what is obtained by concession, or manifestation, and with a continuall fleshy desire are subjected by reason of their corporeall corruption to the sense of pain, and fear swords, and knives. These without doubt Homer seemed to be sensible of, when in the eleventh book of his Odyssey he brings in the mother of Ulysses being dead, standing near to him offering sacrifice, but neither knowing him or speaking to him, whilst he with his sword drawn did keep off ghosts from the blood of the sacrifice. But after that Tyresia the prophetess advising of her, she had tasted of the sacrifice, and had drunk the blood, she presently knew her son, and crying spake to him. But the soul of Tyresia the prophetesse, notwithstanding the drawn sword, even before she tasted the bloud, knew Ulysses, and spake to him, and shewed him the ghost of his mother standing near to him. Whatsoever vices therefore souls have committed in the bodies unexpiated in this life, they are constrained, carrying the habits of them along with them, to purge themselves of them in hell, and to undergo punishment for them; which the Poet explains in these verses;
For as the manners and habits of men are in this life, such affections for the most part follow the soul after death, which then calls to mind those things which it did formerly do in its life, and then intently thinks on them, for as much as then the divers offices of life cease, as those of nourishing, growing, generating, and various occupations of senses, and humane affairs, and comforts, and obstacles of a grosser body. Then are nepreenated to the phantastick reason those species, which are so much the more turbulent and furious, by how much in such souls there lies hid an intellectuall spark more or lesse covered, or altogether extinct, into which are then by evil spirits conveyed species either most false, or terrible: whence now it is tormented in the concupiscile faculty, by the concupiscence of an imaginary good, or of those things which it did formerly affect in its life time, being deprived of the power of enjoying them, although it may seem to it self sometimes almost to obtain its delights, but to be driven from them by the evil spirits into bitter torments, as in the Poets, Tantalus from a banquet, Sardanapalus from embraces, Midas from gold, Sisyphus from power; and they called these souls hobgoblins, whereof if any taking care of household affairs lives and inhabits quietly in the house, it is called a houshold  god, or familiar. But they are most cruelly tortured in the irascible faculty with the hatred of an imaginary evil, into the perturbations whereof, as also false suspicions, and most horrible Phantasmes they then fall, and there are represented to them sad representations; sometimes of the heaven falling upon their head, sometimes of being consumed by the violence of flames, sometimes of being drowned in a gulfe, sometimes of being swallowed up into the earth, sometimes of being changed into divers kinds of beasts, sometimes of being torn and devoured by ugly monsters, sometimes of being carried abroad, through woods, seas, fire, air, and through fearfull infernall places, and sometimes of being taken, and tormented by devils. All which we conceive happens to them after death no otherwise then in this life to those who are taken with a phrensie, and some other melancholy distemper, or to those who are affighted with horrible things seen in dreams, and are thereby tormented, as if those things did really happen to them, which truely are not reall, but only species of them apprehended in imagination: even so do horrible representations of sins terrifie those souls after death as if they were in a dream, and the guilt of wickedness drives them headlong through divers places; which therefore Orpheus calls the people of dreams, saying, the gates of Pluto cannot be unlocked; within is a people of dreams; such wicked souls therefore enjoying no good places, when wandring  in an Aeriall body, they represent any form to our sight, are called hags, and goblins, inoffensive to them that are good, but hurtfull to the wicked, appearing one while in thinner bodies, another time in grosser, in the shape of divers animals, and monsters, whose conditions they had in their life time, as sings the Poet,
For the impure soul of a man, who in this life contracted too great a habit to its body, doth by a certain inward affection of the elementall body frame another body to it self of the vapours of the elements, refreshing as it were from an easie matter as it were with a suck, that body which is continually vanishing; to which being moreover enslaved as to a prison, and sensible instrument by a certain divine Law, doth in it suffer cold, and heat, and whatsoever annoys the body, spirit, and sense, as stinks, howlings, wailings, gnashing of the teeth, stripes, tearings, and bonds, as Virgil sang;
These souls sometimes do inhabit not these kinds of bodies only, but by a too great affection of flesh and blood transmute themselves into other animals, and seize upon the bodies of creeping things, and brutes, entering into them, what kind soever they be of, possessing them like Demons. Pythagoras is of the same opinion, and before him Trismegistus, asserting that wicked souls do oftentimes go into creeping things, and into brutes, neither do they as essentiall forms vivifie  and inform those bodies, but as an inmate dwell there as in a prison, or stand neer them by a locall indistance as an internall mover to the thing moved; or being tyed to them are tormented, as Ixion to the wheel of serpents, Sysiphus to a stone; neither do they enter into brutes only, but sometimes into men, as we have spoken concerning the soul of Nabaoth which went forth a lying spirit in the mouth of the Prophets. Hence some have asserted that the lives, or spirits of wicked men going into the bodies of some men, have disturbed them, and sometimes slew them. Which is more fortunately granted unto blessed souls that like good Angels they should dwell in us, and enlighten us, as we read of Elias, that he being taken from men his spirit fell upon Elisha: and elsewhere we read that God took of the spirit which was in Moses, and gave it to. men. Here lies a great secret, and not rashly to be revealed. Sometimes also (which yet is very rare) souls are driven with such a madness that they do enter the bodies not only of the living, but also by a certain hellish power wander into dead Carkasses, and being as it were revived commit horrid wickednesses, as we read in Saxo Grammaticus, that Asuitas and Asmundus, two certain men vowed one to the other, that he that should live longest should be buried with him that was first dead: at length Asuitus being first dead, is buried in a great vault with his dog, and horse, with whom also Asmundus by reason of his oath of friendship, suffered himself to be buried alive, (meat which he should for a long time eat, being brought to him); in processe of time Ericus King of Suecia, passing by that place with an army, breaking up the tomb of Asuitus (supposing that there was treasure) the vault being opened, brought forth Asmundus: whom, when he saw having a hideous look, being smeared over with filthy corrupt blood which flowed from a green wound (for Asuitus being revived, in the nights, took off with often struggling his right ear), he commanded him to tell him the cause of that wound: which he declares in these verses;
Pausanias tels a story not unlike to this, taken out of the interpreters of the Delphi; viz that there was a certain infernall Demon, which they called Eurinomus, who would eat the flesh of dead men, and devour it so that the bones would scarce be left. We read also in the Chronicles of the Cretensians, that the ghosts which they call Catechanæ were wont to return back into their bodies, and go to their wives, and lie with them; for the avoyding of which, and that they might annoy their wives no more, it was provided in the common lawes that the heart of them that did arise should be thrust thorow with a nail, and their whole carcasse be burnt. These without doubt are wonderfull things, and scarce credible, but that those lawes, and ancient Histories make them credible. Neither is it altogether strange in Christian Religion that many souls were restored to their bodies, before the universall resurrection. Moreover we beleeve that many by the singular favour of God are together with their bodies received to glory, and that many went down alive to hell. And we have heard that oftentimes the bodies of the dead were by the devils taken from the graves, without doubt for no other use then to be imprisoned, and tomented in their hands. And to these prisons and bonds of their bodies there are added also the possessions of most filthy and abominable places, where are Aetnean fires, gulfes of water, the shakings of thunder, and lightening, gapings of the Earth, and where the region is void of light, and receives not the rayes of the Sun, and knows not the light of the Stars, but is alwayes dark. Whither Ulysses is reported in Homer to come, when he sings,
Neither are those mere fables which many have recorded of the cave of Patricius, of the den of Vulcan of the Aetnean caves, and of the den of Nursia, many that have seen and known them testifying the same. Also Saxo Grammaticus tells of greater things then these of the Pallace of Geruthus, and of the cave of Ugarthilocus: Also Pliny, Solinus, Pythias, Clearchus, of the wonderfull prodigies of the Northern sea, of which Tacitus also in his history of Drusus shewes that in the German sea there wandred souldiers  by whom divers miraculous unheard of things were seen, viz the force of whirlpools, unheard of kinds of birds, sea monsters like men and beasts; and in his book of Germany he tells that the Heldusians, and Axions, who had the face of men, but their other parts were equall to beasts, did dwell there. Which without all doubt were the works of ghosts and divels. Of these also Claudianus long time since sang,
Aristotle relates of the Aeolian Ilands  neer Italy, that in Lipara was a certain tombe, to which no man could go safe by night, and that there were Cymbals and shrill voyces  with certain absurd loud laughter; also tumults and empty sounds made, as the inhabitants did strongly aver; and that upon a time a certain yong  man being drunk went thither, and about night fell asleep neer the cave of the tombe, and was after the third day found by them that sought him, and was taken up for dead; who being brought forth, the solemnities of the funerall being ready, suddainly arose up, and told in order, to the great admiration of all, many things which he had seen and suffered. There is also in Norvegia  a certain mountain most dreadfull to all, cirrounded  by the sea, which commonly is called Hethelbergius, representing Hell, whence there are heard great bewailings, howlings, and scritchings  a mile round about, and over which great vulters  and most black Crows fly, making most horrible noyses, which forbid any to come neer it: Moreover from hence flow two fountaines whereof the one is most intense cold, the other most intense hot, far exceeding all other elements. There is also in the same country toward the Southern corner thereof a Promontory called Nadhegrin, where the Demons of the place are seen by all, in an aeriall body. There is also in Scotland the Mountain Dolorosus, from whence are heard dreadfull lamentations: and in Thuringia there is a mountain called Horrisonus, where dwelt Sylvani, and Satyrs, as fame and experience teacheth, and faithfull writers testifie. There are in divers Countries and Provinces such like miracles as these. I will not relate here those things which I have seen with mine eyes, and felt with mine hands, least by the wonderfull admirablenes and strangeness of them I should by the incredulous be accounted a lyar. Neither do I think it fit to pass by what many of our age think concerning the receptacles of souls, not much differing from these which we have now spoken of: of which Tertullian in his fourth book against the heresies of Marcion saith, it is apparent to every wise man, which hath ever heard of the Elysian fields that there is some locall determination, (which is called Abrahams bosome) for the receiving of the souls of his sons, and that that region is not celestial, yet higher then hell, where the souls of the just rest, untill the consummation of things restore the resurrection of all things with fulnes of reward. Also Peter the Apostle saith to Clemens a king him of these things, thou dost constrain mee O Clemens to publish something conceming things unutterable: Yet as far as I may, I will. Christ, who from the beginning, & alwaies was, was alwaies through each generation, though secretly, present with the godly, with those especially by whom he was desired, and to whom he did most often appear. But it was not time, that the bodies then being resolved, there should be a resurrection: but this rather seemed a remuneration from God, that he that was found just, should remain longer in a body: or that the Lord should translate him (as we see clearly related in the Scripture of some certain iust men). After the like example God dealt with others, who pleased him well, and fullfilling his will were being translated to Paradise reserved for a kingdome. But of those who could not fullfill the rule of justice, but had some relique  of wickedness in their flesh, the bodyes indeed are resolved, but souls are kept in good and pleasant regions, that in the resurrection of the dead, when they shall receive their bodies, being now purged by resolution, they may enjoy an eternall inheritance for those things which they have done well. Ireneus also in the end of his book which he wrot  against the Heresies of the Valentinians, saith: Whereas the Lord went in the middle of the shadow of death, where the souls of the dead were, and after rose again corporeally, and after resurrection was taken up, it is manifest that the souls of his disciples (for whom he worked these things) should go to some invisible place, appoynted by God, and there tarry untill the resurrection, afterwards receiving their bodyes, and rising again perfectly, i.e. corporeally, as the Lord arose, so shall they come into the presence of God; for no disciple is above his Master; But every one shall be perfect as his Master. Therefore even as our Master did not presently fly and go away, but expected the time of his resurrection determined by the father, which is also manifested by Jonas, after three daies  arising he is taken up; So also ought we to expect the time or our resurrection determined by God, foretold by the Prophets; and so rising again we shall be taken up, as many as the Lord shall account worthy of this honour; Lactantius Firmianus also agreeth to this, in that book of Divine institutions, whose title is of Divine reward; Saying, let no man think, that the souls after death are presently judged; for they are all detained in one common custody, untill the time cometh in which the great Judge shall examine deserts; then they whose righteousness shall be approved, shall receive the reward of immortality: but they whose sins and wickednes are detected, shall not rise again, but being destinated for certain punishment, shal be shut up with the wicked angels into the same darknes; of the same opinion are Austine, and Ambrose, who sayth in his Enchiridion, The time which is interposed betwixt the death of man and the last resurrection, containeth the soul in secret receptacles: as everyone is worthy of rest or sorrow, according to that which it obtained whilst it lived in the flesh; but Ambrose in his book concerning the benefits of death, saith; The writing of Esdras calleth the habitations of the souls, store houses; which be meting with the complaints of man (because that the Just who have gone before, may seem, even to the day of Judgement viz for a long time, to be wonderfully defrauded of their just recompense of reward) doth liken the day of judgement to a garland; for the day of reward is expected of all, that in the mean time both the conquered may be ashamed, and the conquerors may attain the palme of victory; therefore while the fulnes of time is expected, the souls expect their due recompense; punishment remaining for some, glory for others; and in the same place he calleth Hell a place which is not seen, which the souls go to being separated from the bodies; And in his second book of Cain and Abel, he saith, the soul is loosed from the body, and after the end of this life, is even as yet in suspence, being doubtfull of the judgement to come; To these assenteth that evangelical saying, concerning the last judgement, Christ saying in Matthew: Many shall say to mee in that day, Lord, lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils? And then I shall confess to them, that I never knew them; by which speech it seemeth to be clear, that even untill this day they were uncertain concerning their sentence, and by the confidence of miracles which they had performed in the name of Jesus, whilst they lived, to have bin in some hope of salvation; Therefore because the judgement of souls is deferred untill the last day, many Theologians think that satisfactory intercessions may help not only the Justified, but also the damned, before the appoynted day of iudgment. So Trajan the Emperor was delivered from Hell by Saint Gregory, and Justified to salvation, though some think that he was not freed from the guilt of punishment, but the Justice of punishment was prorogued  untill the day of iudgment; But Thomas Aquinas saith it seemeth more probable, that by the intercessions of S. Gregory, Trajan lived again, and obtained a gracious power by the which he was freed from the punishment and guilt of sin; and there are some Theologians who think, that by the Dirges for the dead neither the punishment nor the guilt is taken away or detracted, but that only some ease and asswagement of the pains is procured; and this by the similitude of a sweating porter, who by the sprinkling of some water seemeth to be eased of the weight of his burthen, or helped to carry it more easily, although nothing of the burthen be taken off: Yet the common opinion of Theologians denyeth that prayers or funerall Diriges do cause any favour for the guilty within the gates of Pluto: but seeing all these things are of an incomprehensible obscurity, many have vainly whet their wits on them: Therefore we holding to the opinion of Austine, as he saith in the tenth book on Genesis, do affirm, That it is better to doubt concerning occult things, then to contend about uncertain things; for I doubt not but that that rich man is to be understood in the flames of pains, and that poor man in the refreshment of joyes; but how that flame of hell, that bosom of Abraham, that tongue of the rich man, that torment of thirst, that drop of cooling, are to be understood, it is hardly found out by the modest searcher, but by the contentious never; but these things being for this present omitted, we hasten to further matters and will dispute concerning the restitution of souls.
By the things which have been already spoken, it is manifest that souls after death do as yet love their body which they left, as those souls do whose bodies want a due buriall: or have left their bodies by violent death, and as yet wander about their carkasses  in a troubled and moist spirit, being as it were allured by something that hath an affinity with them; the means being known by the which in times past they were joyned to their bodi, they may easily be called forth & allured by the like vapours, liquors and savours, certain artificiall lights being also used, songs, sounds and such like, which do move the imaginative and spirituall Harmony of the soul; also sacred invocations, and such like, which belong to Religion, ought not to be neglected, by reason of the portion of the rationall soul, which is above nature: So the witch is said to have called up Samuel, and the Thessalian prophetesse in Lucan, to have caused a carcasse to stand upright: Hence we read in Poets, and those who relate these things, that the souls of the dead cannot be called up without blood and a carkasse: but their shadowes to be easily allured by the fumigations of these things; eggs being also used, and milk, honey, oil, wine, water, flowre, as it were yeelding a fit medicine for the souls to reassume their bodies, as you may see in Homer, where Circe at large instructeth Ulysses; yet they think, that these things can be done in those places only where these kinds of souls are known to be most conversant, either by reason of some affinity, as their dead body alluring them, or by reason of some affection imprinted in their life, drawing the soul itself to certain places, or by reason of some hellish nature of the place; and therefore fit for the punishing or purging of souls: places of this kind are best known by the meeting of nocturnall visions and incursions, and such like Phantasmes; Some are sufficiently known by themselves, as buriall places and places of execution, and where publike  slaughters have lately been made, or where the carkasses  of the slain, not as yet expiated, nor rightly buried, were some few yeers since put into the ground; for expiation and exorcisation of any place, and also the holy right of buriall being duely perfomeed to the bodies, oftentimes prohibiteth the souls themselves to come up, and driveth them farther off the places of judgement; Hence Necromancy hath its name, because it worketh on the bodies of the dead, and giveth answers by the ghosts and apparitions of the dead, and subterrany spirits, alluring them into the carkasses  of the dead, by certain hellish charms, and infernall invocations, and by deadly sacrifices, and wicked oblations; such we read in Lucan of Erichthone the witch, who called up the dead, who foretold to Sextus Pompey all the events of the Pharsalian War: There were also in Phigalia a city of Arcadia, certain magicians, priests most skilful in sacred rites, & raisers up of the souls of the dead: and the holy scriptures testifie, that a certain woman, a witch called up Samuels soul: even so truely the souls of the saints do love their bodies, and hear mote readily there, where the pledges of their reliques  are preserved: but there are two kinds of Necromancy, the one called Necromancy, raising the carkasses, which is not done without blood. The other Sciomancy, in which the calling up of the shadow only sufficeth: to conclude, it worketh all its experiments by the carkases  of the slain, and their bones and members, and what is from them, because there is in these things a spirituall power friendly to them. Therefore they easily allure the flowing down of wicked spirits, being by reason of the similitude and propriety very familiar: by whom the Necromancer strengthened by their help can do very much in humane and terrestriall things, and kindle unlawfull lusts, cause dreams, diseases, hatred and such like passions, to the which also they can confer the powers of these souls, which as yet being involved in a moist and turbid spirit, and wandering about their cast bodies, can do the same things that the wicked spirits commit; seeing therefore they experimentally find, that the wicked and impure souls violently plucked from their bodies, and of men not expiated, and wanting buriall, do stay about their carcases, and are drawn to them by affinity, the witches easily abuse them for the effecting of their witchcrafts, alluring these unhappy souls by the apposition of their body or by the taking of some part thereof, and compelling them by their devillish charmes, by entreating them by the deformed carkases dispersed through the wide fields, and the wandering shadowes of those that want burials, and by the ghosts sent back from Acheron, and the guests of hell, whom untimely death hath precipitated into Hell; and by the horrible desires of the damned, and proud devils revengers of wickedeesses. But he which would restore the souls truely to their bodies, must first know what is the proper nature of the soul from whence it went forth, with how many and how great degrees of perfection it is replenished, with what intelligence it is strengthened, by what means diffused into the body, by what harmony it shall be compacted with it; what affinity it hath with God, with the intelligences, with the heavens, elements, and all other things whose image and resemblance it holdeth. To conclude, by what influences the body may be knit together again for the raising of the dead, requireth all these things which belong not to men but to God only, and to whom he will communicate them, as to Elishai who raised up the son of the Shunamite; so also Alcestis is reported to have been raised by Hercules, and to have lived long after; and Apollonius Tyanensis restored a dead maid to life. And here is to be noted that sometimes it happeneth to men, that their vivifying spirit is retracted in them, and they appear as dead and without sense, when as yet the intellectuall nature remaineth united to the body, and it hath the same form, and remaineth the same body, although the power of vivifying extendeth not it self into it actually, but remaineth retracted in the union with the intellectual nature; yet it ceaseth not to be; and although that man may truly be said to be dead, inasmuch as death is a want of a vivifying spirit, yet is it not truly separated; and that body can be wakened again and live; and thus many miracles appear in these; and of this kind many have been seen amongst the Gentiles and Jewes in former ages, in the number of which is that which Plato reciteth in his tenth book de Republ.', viz that one Phereus of Pamphilia lay ten dayes amongst the slain in battle, and after that he had been taken away and laid to the fire two dayes, he revived and told many wonderfull things which he had seen in the time of his death; and concerning these things we have spoken partly in the first book, and shall yet speak further anon where we shall speak of Oracles, which come forth in a Rapture, Extasie, and in the Agony of dying men.
Mans soul consisteth of a mind, reason and imagination; the mind illuminates reason, reason floweth into the imagination: All is one soul. Reason unless it be illuminated by the mind, is not free from errour: but the mind giveth not light to reason, unless God enlighten, viz the first light; for the first light is in God very far exceeding all understanding: wherefore it cannot be called an intelligible light; but this when it is infused into the mind, is made intellectuall, and can be understood: then when it is infused by the mind to the reason, it is made rationall, and cannot only be understood but also considered: then when it is infused by the reason into the phantasie  of the soul, it is made not only cogitable, but also imaginable; yet it is not as yet corporeall; but when from hence it goeth into the Celestiall vehicle of the soul; it is first made corporeall, yet not manifestly sensible till it hath passed into the elementall body, either simple and Aerial, or compound, in the which the light is made manifestly visible to the eye; The Chaldean  Philosophers considering this progresse of light, declare a certain wonderfull power of our mind: viz that it may come to passe, that our mind being firmly fixed on God, may be filled with the divine power; and being so replenished with light, its beams being diffused through all the media, even to this grosse, dark, heavy, mortall body, it may endow it with abundance of light, and make it like the Stars, and equally shining, and also by the plenty of its beams and lightness lift it on high, as straw lifted up by the flame of fire, and can presently carry the body as a spirit into remote parts. So we read of Philip in the Acts of the Apostles, who baptizing the Eunuch in India, was presently found, in Azotus. The like we read of Habacuc in Daniel: so others going through the doors being shut, escaped both their keepers and imprisonment; as we read of Peter the Apostle and of Peter the Exorcist: He may the less wonder at this, who hath seen those famous melancholick men, who walk in their sleepes and passe through places even unpassible, and ascend even unaccessible places, and exercise the works of those that are awake, which they themselves being awake could not do; of the which things there is no other reason in nature, then a strong and exalted imagination: but this power is in every man, & it is in the soul of man from the root of his Creation; but it is varied in diverse men, in strength and weakness, and is encreased and diminished according to his exercise and use, by the which it is drawn forth from power into act, which thing he that rightly knoweth, can ascend by his knowledge, even untill his imaginative faculty doth transcend and is joyned with the universall power, which Alchindus, Bacon, and Gulielmus Parisiensis do call the sense of nature; Virgil the Etheriall sense, and Plato the sense of the vehicle: and his imagination is made most strong, when that etherial and Celestiall power is poured out upon it, by whose brightness it is comforted, untill it apprehend the species, notions and knowledge of true things, so that that which he thought in his mind, cometh to passe even as he thought, and it obtaineth so great power, that it can plunge, joyn and insinuate it self into the minds of men, and make them certain of his thoughts, and of his will and desire, even thorow large and remote spaces, as if they perceived a present object by their senses; and it can in little time do many things, as if they were done without time; yet these things are not granted to all, but to those whose imaginative and cogitative power is most strong and hath arrived to the end of speculation; and he is fitted to apprehend and manifest all things, by the splendour of the universall power, or intelligence and spirituall apprehension which is above him: and this is that necessary power, which everyone ought to follow and obey, who followeth the truth; if therefore now the power of the imagination is so great, that it can insinuate itself unto whom it pleaseth, being neither hindered nor let by any distance of time or place, and can sometimes draw its heavy body along with it, whither it imagineth and dreameth: There is no doubt but that the power of the mind is greater, if at any time it shall obtain its proper nature, and being no way oppressed by the allurements of the senses, shall persevere both uncorrupted and like it self; but now for example, that the souls abound with so plentifull Light of the Celestiall Stars, and hence, a very great abundance of light redoundeth into their bodies; so Moses face did shine, that the children of Israel could not behold him by reason of the brightness of his countenance; thus Socrates was transfigured, as we read, that in light he overcame the luciferous wheels of the Sun; So Zoroastes  being transfigured, his body was taken up. So Eliah and Enoch ascended to heaven in a certain fiery chariot, so Paul was rapt up into the third heaven: So our bodies after the judgement of the world, shall be called Glorified, and in like manner be rapt up, and we may say by this means, shall shine as the Sun and Moon; which thing that it is possible, and hath formerly been done, Avicebron the Moore, and Avicen the Arabian and Hippocrates of Cous, and all the school of the Chaldeans  do acknowledge and confirm: Moreover it is reported in Histories, that Alexander the great being circumvented and in great danger in India, did so burn in mind, that he seemed to the Barbarians to cast forth light; the father of Theodoricus also is reported to have cast forth sparks of fire tilmugh his whole body; the same thing a wise man also delivered concerning himself, so that sparkling flames did break forth here and there even with a noise; neither is this power of the soul found in men only, but sometimes even in beasts, as in the horse of Tiberius, who seemed to send forth flames out of his mouth. But the mind is above fate in providence, therefore is not affected either with the influences of the heavenly bodies, or the qualities of naturall things; Religion therefore can only cure it; but the sensitiveness of the soul is in fate, above nature, which is in a certain manner the knot of the body and soul, and under fate, above the body; therefore it is changed by the influences of the heavenly bodies, and affected by the qualities of naturall and corporeall things: now I call the sensitiveness of the soul, that vivifying and rectifying power of the body, the originall of the senses; the soul it self doth manifest in this body its sensitive powers and perceiveth corporeall things by the body, and locally moveth the body, and governeth it in his place, and nourisheth it in a body. In this sensitiveness two most principal powers predominate; viz one which is called the Phantasy, or imaginative or cogitative faculty, of whose power we have already spoken, where we have handled the passions of the soul: the other which is called the sense of nature, of the which also we have spoken, where we made mention of witchcraft. Man therefore by the nature of his body is under fate; the soul of man, by the sensitiveness moveth nature in Fate; but by the mind is above fate, in the order of providence; yet reason is free at its own choice; therefore the soul by reason ascendeth into the mind, where it is replenished with divine light; sometimes it descendeth into sensitiveness and is affected by the influences of the heavenly bodies, and qualities of naturall things, and is distracted by the passions and the encountring of sensible objects: sometimes the soul revolveth it selfe wholly into reason, searching out other things either by discourse, or by contemplating it self: for it is possible, that that part of the reason, which the Peripateticks call the possible Intellect, may be brought to this, that it may freely discourse and operate without conversion to his Phantasmes: for so great is the command of this reason, that as often as any thing incurreth either into the mind, or into the sensitiveness, or into nature, or into the body, it cannot passe into the soul, unless reason apply it self to it; by this means the soul perceiveth it self neither to see, nor hear, nor feel, nor that it suffereth any things by the externall senses, untill cogitative reason first apprehend it; but it apprehendeth it when it is at leisure, not when it earnestly gapeth after another thing, as we manifestly see by these who heed not those that they meet, when they more seriously think on something else. Know therefore that neither the superiour influences, nor naturall affections, nor sensations, nor passions either of the mind or body, nor any sensible thing whatsoever, can work or penetrate into the soul unless by the Judgement of reason it self. Therefore by its act, not by any extrinsecall violence, can the soul be either affected or disturbed, which thing even innumerable Martyrs have proved by their Martyrdom: So Anasarchus a Philosopher of Abdera, who, by the command of Nicocreontes a tyrant of Cyprus, being cast into a concave stone neglecting the pains of his body, while he was pounded with iron pestils, is reported to have said: pound, pound the shell of Anasarchus, thou nothing hurteth Anasarchus himself: The tyrant commanded his tongue to be cut off, but he with his own teeth did bite it off, and did spit it in the face of the Tyrant.
The minde, because it is from God, or from the intelligible world, is therefore immortal and eternal; but reason is long-lived by the benefit of its celestial original from the Heaven; but the sensitive because it is from the bosome of the matter and dependeth on sublunary nature, is subject to destruction and corruption: therefore the soul by its minde is immortall, by its Reason long-lived in its etherial vehicle, but resolvable unless it be restored in the circuit of its new body; therefore it is not immortal, unless it be united to an immortal mind: therefore the sensitiveness of the soul or the sensitive or animal soul, because it is produced out of the bosome of a corporeal matter, the body being resolved, perisheth together with it, or the shadow thereof remaineth not long in the vapours of its resolved body, partaking nothing of immortality, unless it be also united to a more sublimed power; therefore the soul which is united to the minde, is called the Soul standing not falling; but all men obtain not this minde, because (as Hermes saith) God would propound it as it were a prize and reward of the souls, which they that shall neglect, being without minde, spotted with corporeall senses, and made like to irrational creatures, are allotted to the same destruction with them, as Ecclesiastes saith: there is the same destruction of man and beasts, and the condition of both is equall; as man dieth, so also they dye, yea they have all one breath, so that man hath no preheminence  over a beast; thus far he. Hence many Theologians think, that the souls of men of this kinde have no immortality after they have left their body, but an hope of the resurrection only, when all men shall be restored. Austin relateth that this was the heresie  of the Arabians, who affirmed that the souls perished together with their bodies; and in the day of judgement did arise again with them; whosoever therefore being upheld by the divine grace have obtained a mind, these according to the proportion of their works become immortal (as Hermes saith) having comprehended all things by their understanding, which are in the earth, and in the sea, and in the Heavens, and if there be any thing besides these above heaven, so that they behold even goodness it self: but they who have lived a middle life, though they have not obtained the divine intelligence, but a certain rationall intelligence of it; these mens souls, when they shall depart from their bodies, are bound over to certain secret receptacles, where they are affected with sensifive powers, and are exercised in a certain kind of act; and by imagination, and the irascible & concupiscible vertues, do either extreamly rejoyce, or greivously  lament. Of which opinion Saint Austin also was, in his book which he wrote of the spirit and soul; The wise men of the Indians, Persians, AEgyptians & Chaldeans  have delivered, that this soul superviveth much longer then its body, yet that it is not made altogether immortal, unless by Transmigration. But our Theologians do philosophize far otherwise concerning these things, that although there be the same common originall and beginning of all souls, yet they are distinguished by the creator with divers degrees, not only accidentall, but also intrinsecall, founded in their very essence, by the which one soul differeth from another, by that which is proper to it self; which opinion John Scotus also holdeth, and the Parisian Theologians have so decreed in their articles; Hence the wise man saith, I was an ingenuous child, and obtaihed a good soul, viz a better then many others; and according to this inequality of souls, every one is capable in their degree, of their charge; which gift is freely given by God, as we read in the Gospel, that he gave to one five Talents, to another two, to another one, to every one according to his vertue; and the Apostle saith, he hath given some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists and Doctors, for the consummation of the Saints in the work of the Ministry, for the building up of the body of Christ; for there are (saith Origen) certain invisible perfections, to the which are committed those things which are dispensed here upon earth, in which there is no small difference, as also is required in the men; wherefore some one attaineth the highest degree of wisdome and dignity; another little differeth from beasts, & feeding beasts is made half a beast; another aboundeth in vertues and in wealth; another hath even little or nothing, & oftentimes that little which he hath is taken away from him, & given to him that hath; and this is the divine justice in the distribution of gifts, that they may correspond to the vertues of every receiver, to whom also rewards are given according to their works: that what proportion there is, of gifts to gifts, and of deserts to deserts, there may be the same proportion of rewards to rewards; to conclude, we must know this, that every noble soul hath a fourfold operation; First divine, by the Image of the divine propriety; the second intellectual, by formality of Participation with the intelligences; the third rational, by the perfection of its proper essential essence; the fourth animal or natural, by communion with the body and these Inferior things; So that there is no work in this whole world so admirable, so excellent, so wonderfull, which the soul of man, being associated to his Image of divinity, which the Magitians  call a soul, standing and not falling, cannot accomplish by its own power without any externall help: Therefore the form of all Magical power is from the soul of man standing and not falling.
Soothsaying is that which the priests or others were stricken withall, and discerned the causes of things, and foresaw future things, viz when Oracles and Spirits descend from the Gods or from Demons upon them, and are delivered by them; which descendings the Platonists call the falling down of superior souls on our souls; and Mercurius calls them the senses of the Demons, and the spirits of Demons. Of which sort of Demons the Ancients called Eurideae, and Pythonae, who, as the Ancients believed, were wont to enter into the bodies of men, and make use of the voyces, and tongues, for the prediction of things to come; of which Plutarch also made mention in his dialogue of the causes of defect of Oracles. But Cicero following the Stoicks, affirms that the foreknowing of future things belongs only to the Gods; and Ptolomie  the Astrologer saith, that they only that are inspired with a diety  foretell particular things. To these Peter the Apostle consents, saying, Prophesying is not made according to the will of man, but holy men spake as they were moved by the holy ghost. Now that the foretellings of things to come are properly the fallings down of the Gods. Isaiah affirms, saying, And tell unto us those things that are coming, and we will tell them, because ye are Gods; But these kinds of fallings down, or senses, come not into our souls when they are more attently busied ahout any thing else; but they pass into them, when they are vacant. Now there are three kinds of this vacancy, viz phrensie, extasie, and dreams, of each of which in their order.
Phrensie  is an illustration of the soul coming from the Gods, or Demons. Whence this verse of Ovid,
Plato defines this by alienation, and binding; for he abstracts from those by which the corporeal senses are stirred up, and being estranged from an animal man, adheres to a diety  from whom it receives those things which it cannot search into by its own power; for when the minde is free, and at liberty, the reines of the body being loosed, and going forth as out of a close prison, transcends the bonds of the members, and nothing hindring of it, being stirred up by its own instigations, and instigated by a divine spirit, comprehends all things, and foretells future things. Now there are four kinds of divine phrensie  proceeding from several dieties, viz from the Muses, from Dionysius, from Apollo, and from Venus. The first phrensie therefore proceeding from the Muses, stirs up and tempers the mind, and makes it divine by drawing superior things to inferior things by things natural. Now Muses are the souls of the celestial spheres, according to which there are found several degrees, by which there is an attraction of superior things to inferior. The inferior of these resembling the sphear  of the Moon, possesseth those things which are from vegetables, as plants, fruits of trees, roots, and those which are from harder matters, as Stones, Metals, their alligations, and suspensions. So it is said that the stone Selenites i.e. Moon-Stone, and the stone of the Civet-cat cause divination; also Vervain, and the Hearb  Theangelis cause soothsaying, as hath been ahove said. The second degree resembling Mercury, possesseth those things which are from animals, and which are compounded of the mixtion of divers natural things together, as Cups, and Meats; upon this account the heart of a Mole, if anyone shall eat it whilest it is warm, and panting, conduceth, as it is said, to the foretelling of future events. And Rabbi Moses in his commentaries upon Leviticus tells, that there is an animal called ידוע Jedua, having a humane shape, in the midle  of whose navel comes forth a string, by which it is fastened to the ground like a gourd, and as far as the length of that string reacheth, it devours and consumes all that is green about it, and deceiving the sight, cannot be taken, unless that string he cut off by the stroke of a dart, which being cut off, it presently dies. Now the bones of this animal being after a certain manner laid upon the mouth, presently he whose mouth they are laid on, is taken with a phrensie, and soothsaying. The third degree answers to the sphear  of Venus; This possesseth subtile powders, vapours, and odours, and oyntments, and suffumigations, which are made of these of which we have spoke above. The fourth degree belongs to the sphear  of the Sun; this possesseth voyces, words, singings, and harmonical sounds, by the sweet consonancy whereof it drives forth of the minde any troublesomeness therein, and chears  it up. Whence Hermes, Pythagoras, Plato, advise us to compose a discontented minde, and chear  it up by singing and harmony. So Timotheus is said to have with sounds stirred up King Alexander to a phrensie: so the Priest Calame (Aurelius Augustus being witness) was wont at his pleasure by a certain shrill harmony to call himself forth out of his body into a rapture, and extasie; of these also we have before spoken. The fifth degree is answerable to Mars: this possesseth vehement imaginations, and affections of the minde, conceits also, and motions thereof, of all which before. The sixth degree answers to Jupiter: this possesseth the discourses of reason, deliberations, consultations, and moral purgations: of these we have spoken in part above, and further we shall speak afterwards; It possesseth also admirations, and venerations, at the astonishment of which, the phantasie, and reason are sometimes so restrained, that they suddenly let pass all their own actions: whence then the minde it self being free, and exposed to a diety  only, whether to any God, or Demon, doth receive supernal, and divine influences, viz those concerning which it did deliberate before. So we read that the Sybils, and the Priests of Pythia were wont to receive oracles in the caves of Jupiter, and Apollo. The seventh degree resembles Saturn: this possesseth the more secret intelligencies, and quiet contemplations of the minde. I call here, the contemplation, the free perspicacity of the minde, suspended with admiration upon the beholding of wisdom. For that excogitation which is made by riddles, and images, is a certain kind of speculation, or discourse belonging to Jupiter, and not a contemplation. The eighth degree resembles the starry heaven; this observes the situation, motion, raies, and light of the celestial bodies: it possesseth also images, rings, and such like, which are made after the rule of celestials, as we have abeve spoken. The ninth degree answers to the primum mobile, viz the ninth sphear, as the very universe: this possesseth things more formal, as Numbers, Figures, Characters, and observes the occult influences of the intelligences of the heaven, and other mysteries, which because they bear the effigies of celestial dieties, and invocated spirits, easily allures them, and compelleth them being forced by a certain necessity of conformity to come to one, and detains them, that they shall not easily go back, of which we read in the Oracles in Porphyrie. Now the second phrensie  proceeds from Dionysius: this doth by expiations exterior, and interior, and by conjurations, by mysteries, by solemnities, rites, temples, and observations divert the soul into the mind, the supream  part of it self, and makes it a fit and pure temple of the Gods, in which the divine spirits may dwell, which the soul then possessing as the associate of life, is filled by them with felicity, wisdom, and oracles, not in signs, and marks, or conjectures, but in a certain concitation of the mind, and free motion: So Bacchus did soothsay to the Beotians, and Epimenides to the people of Cous, and the Sybil  Erithea to the Trojans. Sometimes this phrensie  happens through a clear vision, sometimes by an express voyce: So Socrates was governed by his Demon, whose counsel he did diligently obey, whose voyce  he did often hear with his ears, to whom also the shape of a Demon did often appear. Many prophesying spirits also were wont to shew themselves, and be associats with the souls of them that were purified; examples of which there are many in sacred Writ, as in Abraham, and his bond maid Hagar, in Jacob, Gideon, Elias, Tobias, Daniel, and many more. So Adam had familiarity with the Angel Raziel. Shem the son of Noah with Jophiel; Abraham with Zadkiel: Isaac and Jacob with Peliel; Joseph, Joshua and Daniel with Gabriel; Moses with Metattron; Elias with Malhiel; Tobias the younger with Raphael; David with Cerniel; Mannoah with Phadael; Cenez with Cerrel; Ezekiel with Hasmael; Esdras with Uriel; Solomon with Michael. Sometimes the spirits by vertue of the souls enter into, and seize upon organical bodies, whether of brutes or men, and using the souls thereof as the basis, utter voyces  through organical instruments, as is manifest in Baalams Ases, and in Saul, on whom the spirit of the Lord fell, and Prophecyed. Of these Apollo in his answers in Porphyry thus;
Now the third kind of phrensie  proceeds fom Apollo, viz from the mind of the world. This doth by certain sacred mysteries, vows, sacrifices, adorations, invocations, & certain sacred arts, or certain secret confections, by which the spirits of their God did infuse vertue, make the soul rise above the mind, by joyning it with dieties, and Demons: so we read concerning the Ephod, which being applied, they did presently prophecie: so we read in the books of the Senats  in the chapter of Eleazar, that Rabbi Israel made ceraain cakes, writ upon with certain divine and angelicall names, and so consecrated, which they that did eat with faith, hope, and charitie, did presently break forth with a spirit of prophecie. We read in the same place that Rabbi Johena the son of Jochahad, did after that manner enlighten a certain rude countryman, called Eleazar, being altogether illiterate, that being compassed about with a sudden brightness, did unexpectedly preach such high mysteries of the Law to an assembly of wise men, that he did even astonish all that were neer him. And it is reported of a certain man called Herviscus, an Aegyptian, that he was endowed with such a divine nature, that at the very sight of images that had any diety  in them, he was forthwith stirred up with a kind of divine phrensie. We read also in the scripture, that when Saul was amongst the Prophets, the spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he prophecied, and when he went forth from the assembly of the Prophets, he ceased to prophesie; the same happened to those officers which Saul sent to catch David: who when they saw the company of the Prophets, and Samuel standing in the midst of them, received the spirit of the Lord on them, and prophesied also. So great is the abounding of divine light oftentimes in the prophets, taken with a divine phrensie, that it also seiseth  on them that are neer them, and makes them have the same spirit of phrensie: It is not therefore incredible, that an ignorant man should presently be made wise, and again that a wise man become ignorant: for there is a certain art (known but to few) of informing, adorning, & illustrating a pure mind, so that it should presently be recovered out of the darkness of ignorance, and brought to the light of wisdom: and on the contrary, there is a way by certain hid secrets, to make them that have unclean, and unbelieving minds to become ignorant again, although for the present they are learned and wise. Mans mind also, especially when it is simple, and pure, may (Apuleius being witness) by some sacred, and mysterious recreation, and appeasing, be so brought into a sleep, and astonied, that it may forget things present so utterly, as to be brought into its divine nature, and so be enlightned  with the divine light, and inspired with a divine phrensie  that it may foretell things to come, and withall receive the vertue of some wonderfull effects. Whence Iamblicus saith, when the prophets are inspired with a diety, they fear nothing, for they go through wayes unpassable, and are carried into the fire without any hurt, and passe over rivers. So we read of certain caves, as of Apollo, Trophonius, the three footed stools, dens, fountains, lakes, and such like, that were consecrated to the gods after this manner, or made by that mysterie, that from thence the priests might draw the spirit of prophecying, as Iamblicus in Porphyrie: The Sybill  (saith he) in Delphi was wont to receive God after two wayes: either by a subtill  spirit, and fire, which did break forth somewhere out of the mouth of the cave, where she sitting in the entrance upon a brazen three footed stool dedicated to a diety, was divinely inspired, and did utter prophecyings; or a great fire flying out of the cave did cirround  this prophetess, stirring her up, being filled with a diety, to prophesie, which inspiration also she received as she sate upon a consecrated seat, breaking forth prently into predictions. Moreover there was a prophetess in Branchi which sate upon an extree, and either held a wand in her hand, given to her by some diety, or washed her feet, and sometimes the hem of her garment in the waters, or drew the vapour of fire from the waters. By all these she was filled with divine splendour, and did unfold many Oracles. We also read that in the country of Thracia there was a certain passage consecrated to Bacchas, from whence predictions, and Oracles were wont to be given: the Priors of whose temples having drank wine abundantly did do strange things. Amongst the Clarians also, where the temple of Clarius Apollo was, to whom it was given to utter divine things, they having drank much wine did strange things. There was also a propheticall fountain of Father Achaia, constituted before the temple of Ceres, where they that did enquire of the event of the sick did let down a glass by degrees tied to a small cord, to the top of the water, and certain supplications and fumes being made, the event of the thing did appear in the glass. There was also not far from Epidaurus a City of Laconia a deep Fen, which was called the water of Juno, into which cakes of corn being cast, answers were given, fortunate, if the waters did quietly retain what was cast in; but unhappy, if they did as it were, scorning of them, cast them back. The like they say do the caves of Aetna, into which money or sacrifices did shew the same presage of good or ill, by being retained, or rejected. The like things reports Dion in his Romane History, in a place which they call the Nymphs: where Frankincense being cast into the flames, Oracles were received concerning all those things which he did desire to know, especially concerning death, and those things which belonged to marriages. Wonderfull also is that which Aristotle relates of a certain fountain of the Paliscans of Sicilia, to which they that did take an oath did go, and whatsoever they did affirm upon oath writ it upon tables, which they cast into the fountain. If those things were true, the tables would swim; if false, sink; then fire coming suddenly forth burned him that was perjured into ashes. There was also in the City Dodona an Oak, which assoon as any one entered in to receive an answer, did forthwith move, and make a sound; there was also a statue holding a wand, which did strike a bason, whereby the bason made answer by moderated strokes. Whence it is read in the Epistle of Austinus to Paulinus,
Now the fourth kind of Phrensie proceeds from Venus, and it doth by a fervent love convert, and transmute the mind to God, and makes it altogether like to God, as it were the proper image of God; whence Hermes saith, O Asclepius! Man is a great miracle, an animal to be honoured and adored: for he passeth into the nature of God, whereby he becomes God: He knows the rise of Demons, and he knows himself to have his originall with them, despising the part of his humane nature in himself, having a sure confidence of the divinity of the other; The soul therefore being converted, and made like to God, is so formed of God, that it doth above all intellect, know all things by a certain essential contract of Divinity: therefore Orpheus describes love to be without eyes, because it is above the intellect. Now then the soul being so converted into God by love, and sublimated above the intellectuall spear, doth beside that it hath by its integrity obtaind the spirit of prophecie, sometimes work wonderfull things, and greater then the nature of the world can do, which works are called miracles. For as the heaven by its image, light, and heat, doth those things, which the force of the fire cannot do by its naturall quality (which in Alchymie  is most known by experience) so also doth God by the image and light of himself do those things, which the world cannot do by its innate vertue. Now the image of God is man, at least such a man that by a phrensie  from Venus is made like to God, and lives by the mind only, and receives God into himself. Yet the soul of man according to the Hebrew Doctors and Cabalists, is defined to be the light of God, and Created after the image of the word, the cause of causes, the first example, and the substance of God, figured by a seal whose Character is the eternall word. Which Mercurius Trismegistus considering, saith, that such a man is more excellent then they that are in heaven, or at least equall to them.
A rapture is an abstraction, and alienation, and an illustration of the soul proceeding from God, by which God doth again retract the soul, being falled from above to hell, from hell to heaven. The cause of this is in us a continuall contemplation of sublime things, which as far as it conjoyns  with a most profound intention of the mind, the soul to incorporeal wisdom, doth so far recall it self with its vehement agitations from things sensible and the body, and (as Plato saith) in such a manner sometimes, that it even flieth out of the body, and seemeth as it were dissolved: even as Aurelius Austin reporteth concerning a Priest of Calamia; (or whom we have made mention before) he lay (saith he) most like unto a dead man, without breath; and when he was burnt with fire and wounded, he felt it not; so great therefore is the command of the soul: viz when it hath obtained its own nature, and is not oppressed by the allurements of the senses, that by its own power it suddenly ascendeth, not only remaining in the body, but even sometimes loosed from its fetters, and flyeth forth of the body to the supercelestiall habitations, where now it being most nigh, and most like to God, and made the receptacle of divine things, it is filled with the divine Light and Oracles. Whence Zoroastes  saith, thou must ascend to the light it self, and to the beams of the Father, whence thy soul was sent thee, clothed with very much mind; and Trismegisius saith, it is nccessary that thou ascend above the heavens, and be far from the quire of spirits; and Pythagoras saith, if thou by leaving the body shalt pass into the spacious heavens, thou shalt be an immortall god. So we read that Hermes, Socrates, Xenocrates, Plato, Plotine, Heraclitus, Pythagoras and Zoroastes, were wont to abstract themselves by rapture, and so to learn the knowledge of many things: also we read in Herodotus, that there was in Proconnesus a Philosopher of wonderfull knowledge, called Atheus, whose soul sometimes went out of the body, and after the visitation of places far remote, returned again into the body more learned: Pliny reporteth the same thing, that the soul of Harman Clazomenius was wont to wander abroad, his body being left, and to bring true tidings of things very far off; and there are even to this day in Norway and Lapland very many who can abstract themselves three whole dayes from their body, and being returned declare many things which are afar off; and in the meantime it is necessary to keep them, that not any living creature come upon them or touch them; otherwise they report that they cannot return into their body. Therefore we must know, that (according to the doctrine of the Aegyptians,) seeing the soul is a certain spirituall light, when it is loosed from the body, it comprehendeth every place and time, in such a manner as a light inclosed in a Lanthern, which being open, difffseth it self every where, and faileth not any where, for it is every where, and continually; and Cicero in his book of Divination saith, neither doth the soul of man at any time divine,  when it is so loosed that it hath indeed little or nothing to do with the body; when therefore it shall attain to that state, which is the supream  degree of contemplative perfection, then it is rapt from all created species, and understandeth not by acquired species, but by the inspection of the Ideas, and it knoweth all things by the light of the Ideas: of which light Plato saith few men are partakers in this life; but in the hands of the gods, all: also they who are troubled with the syncope and falling sickness, do in some manner imitate a rapture, and in these sicknesses sometimes as in a rapture do bring forth prophesie, in which kind of prophesying we read that Hercules and many Arabians were very excellent, and there are certain kinds of soothsayings, which are a middle betwixt the confines of naturall predictions, and supernaturall Oracles, viz which declare things to come from some excess of passion, as too much love, sorrow, or amongst frequent sights, or in the agony of death, as in Statius, of the mother of Achilles;
For there is in our minds a certain perspicuous power, and capable of all things, but encumbred and hindred by the darkness of the body and mortality, but after death it having acquired immortality, and being freed from the body it hath full and perfect knowledge. Hence it cometh to pass, that they who are nigh to death, and weakened by old age, have sometimes somewhat of an unaccustomed light, because the soul being less hindred by the senses, understandeth very acutely, and being now as it were a little relaxed from its bands, is not altogether subject to the body, and being as it were nigher to the place, to the which it is about to go, it easily perceiveth revelations, which being mixed with its agonies, are then offered to it; whence Ambrose in his book of the belief of the resurrection, saith, Which being free in the aerial motion, knoweth not whither it goeth, and whence it cometh; yet we know that it superviveth the body, and that it being freed, the chains of its senses being cast off, freely discerneth those things which it saw not before, being in the body, which we may estimate by the example of those who sleep, whose mind being quiet, their bodies being as it were buried, do elevate themselves to higher things, and do declare to the body the visions of things absent, yea even of celestial things.
Now I call that a dream, which proceedeth either from the spirit of the phantasie  and intellect united together, or by the illustration of the Agent intellect above our souls, or by the true revelation of some divine power in a quiet and purified mind; for by this our soul receiveth true oracles, and abundantly yieldeth prophesies  to us: for in dreams we seem both to Ask questions, and learn to read and find them out; also many doubtfull things, many Policies, many things unknown, and unwished for, nor ever attempted by our minds, are manifested to us in Dreams: also the representations of unknown places appear, and the Images of men both alive and dead, and of things to come are foretold; and also things which at any times have happened, are revealed, which we knew not by any report; and these dreams need not any art of interpretation, as those of which we have spoken in the first book, which belong to divination, not fore-knowledge; and it cometh to pass that they who see these dreams, for the most part understand them not; for (as Abdala the Arabian saith) as to see dreams, is from the strength of imagination, so to understand them, is from the strength of understanding; whose intellect therefore, being overwhelmed by the too much commerce of the flesh, is in a dead sleep, or its imaginative or phantastick spirit is too dull and unpolished, that it cannot receive the species and representations which flow from the superior intellect, and retain them when received, this man is altogether unfit for the soothsaying by dreams. Therefore it is necessary, that he who would receive true dreams, should keep a pure, undisturbed, and an undisquieted imaginative spirit, and so compose it, that it may be made worthy of the knowledge and government by the mind and understanding: for such a spirit is most fit for prophesying, and (as Sinesius saith) is a most clear glass of all the Images which flow everywhere from all things: when therefore we are sound in body, not disturbed in mind, not dulled by meat or drink, nor sad through poverty, nor provoked by any vice of lust or wrath, but chastly going to bed, fall asleep, then our pure and divine soul being loosed from all hurtfull thoughts, and now freed by dreaming, is endowed with this divine spirit as an instrument, and doth receive those beams and representations which are darted down, and shine forth from the divine minde into it self; and as it were in a deifying glass, it doth far more certainly, clearly, and efficaciously behold all things, then by the Vulgar enquiry of the intellect, and by the discourse of reason; the divine power instructing the soul, being invited to their society by the opportunity of the nocturnal solitariness; neither further will that deity be wanting to him when he is awaked, which ruleth all his actions: whosoever therefore doth, by quiet and religious meditation, and by a diet temperate and moderated according to nature, preserve his spirit pure, doth very much prepare himself, that by this means he may become divine, and knowing all things; but whosoever, on the contrary, doth languish with a phantastick spirit, receiveth not perspicuous and distinct visions, but even as the divine sight, by reason of its weakness, Judgeth confusedly and indistinctly; and also when we are overcome with wine and drunkenness, then our spirit being oppressed with noxious vapours (as a troubled water is wont to appear in divers forms) is deceived, & waxeth dull; for which cause Amphiarus the Prophet (as we read in Philostratus) commanded those, who would receive Oracles, to abstain one whole day from meat, and three days from wine, that the soul could not rightly prophesie  unless it were free from wine, and meat; for to sober and religious minds, attending on the divine worship, the Gods are wont to give Oracles; whence Orpheus crieth out,
And the rulers of the Lacedemonians (as Cicero saith) were wont to lye  down in the Temple at Pasiphae, that they might dream. The same was done in the Temple of Aesculapius, from whom true dreams were thought to be sent forth. And the Calabrians, consulting Podalyrius the son of Aesculapius, did sleep neer his Sepulchre in lambes skins; for so doing they were told in their dreams whatsoever they desired to know; for the most usuall time for dreams is the night, when the senses are freed from wandring objects, and meridian errours, and vain affections; neither doth fear strike the minde, nor the thought tremble, and the mind being most quiet, doth steadfastly adhere to the Deity; for there are, (as Rabbi Johenan in his book of Senatours saith) four kinds of true dreams: the first Matutine, which is made betwixt sleep and awaking: the second, which one seeth concerning another: the third, whose interpretation is shewen to the same dreamer in the nocturnall vision: the fourth, which is repeated to the same dreamer, according to that which Joseph saith to Pharaoh, But that thou hast seen the dream belonging to the same thing the second time, it is a sign of confirmation; But that dream is most sure, which is concerning those things which one did meditate on, and revolve in his minde, when he goeth to bed, as it is written, Thou O King didst think upon thy bed, what should become of these things; but it is necessary, that he which interpreteth other mens dreams, hath the knowledge by the which he can distinguish and discern the similitudes of all things, and know the customes of all nations, according to the laws which they have received from God and his Angels; farther this must be known, that there is scarce any dream without some vanity, as no grain of corn without his chaffe, which thing even the dream of Joseph the Patriarch manifesteth; which his father Jacob interpreted, saying; what meaneth this dream, that thou hast seen? what shall I, and thy mother, and thy brethren fall down and worship thee? which effect concerning his mother, who shortly after died, followed not. Also Rabbi Johenan in the forecited book, saith these things; and also Rabbi Levi affirmeth, that no prophetical dream can be kept back from his effect longer then twenty two years; so Joseph dreamed in the seventeenth year of his age; which was accomplished in the thirty ninth year of his age; therefore whosoever would receive divine dreams, let him be well disposed in body, his brain free from vapours, and his mind from perturbations, and let him that day abstain from supper, neither let him drink that which will inebriate, let him have a clean and neat chamber, also exorcised and consecrated: in the which, a perfume being made, his temples anoynted, things causing dreams being put on his fingers, and the representation of the heavens being put under his head, and paper being consecrated, his prayers being said, let him go to bed, earnestly meditating on that thing he desireth to know: So he shall see most true and certain dreams with the true illumination of his intellect: whosoever therefore shall know to joyn together those things which here and there we have delivered concerning this matter in these books, he shall easily obtain the gift of oracles and dreams.
There are also certain Lots having a divine power of Oracles, and as it were Indexes of divine judgement, being before sought for by earnest prayer, and sometimes commanded by God himself to be done, as is read in Leviticus concerning a goat to be offered to the Lord, and of the scape goat; and in the book of Numbers of the rods of the Tribes of Israel. Now both Moses and Joshua did by Lots in the presence of the Lord divide the lands, and inheritances to the tribes of Israel according to the command of God. The Apostles of Christ, prayers going before, did by lot choose Matthias into the place of Judas the traitor. Jonas the Prophet when he flying from the presence of God did sail to Tharsus, a dangerous storm being raised, was by lot found out by the Mariners to be the cause of the danger, and being cast into the sea, the tempest seased. Caesar reports of M. Valerius Procillus, being taken by his enemies, concerning whom it was consulted whether he should be presently burnt, or reserved to another time, that by lot he escaped safe. There was formerly at Bura, a Town of Achaia, an oracle of Hercules constituted by a chest bord, where he that went to consult of any thing, after he had prayed, cast four dice, the cast of which the Prophet observing, did find written in the chestboard  what should come to pass: now all such dice were made of the bones of sacrifices. Now this you must know, that the Ancients were not wont upon every slight cause to cast lots, but either upon necessity, or for some advantageous end, and that not but with great devotion, reverence, expiations, fasting, purity, prayers, invocations, vowes, sacrifices, consecrations, and such like sacred mysteries of religion. For these sacred ordinances were wont to go before our works, especially to procure the divine good will, and pleasure, and the presence of the divine spirits, by whose dispensation the lot being directed, we may receive a true judgement of the things sought for. Every one therefore that works by lots, must go about it with a mind well disposed, not troubled, nor distracted, and with a strong desire, firm deliberation, and constant intention of knowing that which shall be desired. Moreover he must, being qualified with purity, chastity, and holiness towards God, and the celestials, with an undoubted hope, firm faith, and sacred orations, invocate them, that he may be made worthy of receiving the divine spirits, and knowing the divine pleasure; for if thou shalt be qualified, they will discover to thee most great secrets by vertue of lots, and thou shalt become a true Prophet, and able to speak truth concerning things past, present, and to come, of which thou shalt be demanded. Now what we have spoken here concerning lots, is also to be observed in the auguries of all discemings, viz when with fear, yet with a firm expectation we prefix to our souls for the sake of prophecying some certain works, or require a sign, as Eleasar, Abrahams countryman, & Gideon Judge in Israel are read to have done. There was once at Pharis a City of Achaia in the midle of the market a statue of Mercury, where he that went to receive any omen, did, frankincense being fumed, and candies being lighted, which were set before it, and that country coin being offered on the right hand of the statue, whisper into the right ear of the statue whatsoever he would demand, and presently his ears being stopped with both his hands, did make haste away from the market place, which when he was past, did presently, his ears being opened, observe the first voice he did hear from any man for a certain Oracle given to him. Although therefore these kinds of lots seem to the ignorant to be casuall, or fortuitous, and to have nothing of reason in them, yet they are disposed by God, and the higher vertues by certain reasons, neither they do fall beside the intention of him that moderates them. Was not the lot in choosing Saul to be King of Israel, thought to fall upon him casually, and fortuitously? Yet he was before appointed by the Lord to be King, and annointed by the Prophet Samuel. And God that appointed him King, disposed of the Lot that it should fall upon him. And thus much of these.
Whosoever therefore being desirous to come to the Supream state of the soul, goeth to receive oracles, must go to them being chastly and devoutly disposed, being pure and clean go to them, so that his soul be polluted with no filthiness, and free from all guilt. He must also so purifie  his mind and body as much as he may from all diseases, and passions, and all irrationall conditions, which adhere to it as rust to iron, by rightly composing and disposing those things which belong to the tranquillity of the mind; for by this means he shall receive the truer and more efficacious Oracles. Now by what things the mind is purged, and reduced into a divine purity, we must learn by Religion, and wisdom. For neither wisdom without Religion, nor Religion without wisdom is to be approved off: For wisdom (as saith Solomon) is the tree of life to them that lay hold on it. And Lucretius saith that it is the intention of God, or the breathings of God, where he sings.
He also understandeth that to be a divine illustration, whence Democritus thinketh that there are no men wise but they that are struck with some divine phrensie, as was Menos that Cretensian, whom they report learned all things of Jupiter, whence he had frequent converse with God in the mount Ida: so also the Athenians report that Melosagora Eleusinus was taught by the Nymphs; so also we read, that Hesiod when he was a Shepherd in Beotia, and kept his flock neer the mountain Helicon, had some pens given him by the Muses, which having received, he presently became a Poet, which to become so sodainly  was not of man, but by a divine inspiration; for God conveying himself into holy souls, makes men Prophets, and workers of miracles, being powerfull in work and speech, as Plato and Mercurius affirm, and also Xistus the Pythagorian, saying that such a man is the temple of God, and that God is his guest: to whom assents our Paul, calling man the temple of God; and in another place speaking of himself, I can do all things in him that strengtheneth me; for he is our power, without which (as he saith) we can do nothing; which also Aristotle confesseth in his Meteors and Ethicks, saying, that there is no vertue whether naturall or morall but by God; and in his secrets he saith that a good and sound intellect can do nothing in the secrets of nature without the influence of divine vertue. Now we receive this influence then only, when we do acquit our selves from burdensome impediments, and from carnall and Terrene occupations, and from all external agitation; neither can a blear or impure eye behold things too light, neither can he receive divine things who is ignorant of the purifying of his mind. Now we must come to this purity of mind by degrees; neither can any one that is initiated newly unto those mysteries presenfly comprehend all cleer  things, but his mind must be accustomed by degrees, until the intellect becomes more enlightened, and applying it self to divine light be mixed with it. A humane soul therefore when it shall be righfly purged, and expiated, doth then, being loosed from all impurity, break forth with a liberall motion, and ascends upwards, receives divine things, instructs it self, when happily it seems to be instructed from elsewhere; neither doth it then need any remembrance, or demonstration by reason of the industry of it self, as by its mind which is the head and the pilot of the soul, it doth, imitating by its own nature the angels, attain to what it desires, not by succession or time, but in a moment. For David when he had not learning, was of a Shepherd made a Prophet, and most expert of divine things. Solomon in the dream of one night, was filled with the knowledge of all things above and below. So Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the other Prophets, and Apostles were taught. For the soul (which is the common opinion of the Pythagorians, and Platonists) can by way of purification, without any other study, or searching, only by an easie, and adventitious collating on these intelligibles received from above, acquire the perfect knowledge of all things knowable. It can also by an extrinsecall expiation attain to this, as to understand all things Invisibly by its substantiall form. For the mind is purged, and expiated by cleansing, by abstinence, by penitency, by almes: and then also do thereunto conduce certain sacred institutions, as shall afterward be discovered. For the soul is to be cured by the study of Religions, and indeed these which are commonly called occult, that being restored to its soundness, confirmed by truth, and fortified by divine graces, may not fear any rising shakings.
We must therefore first observe cleanness in food, in works, in affections, and to put away all filthiness, and perturbations of the mind, and whatsoever sense or spirit that offends, and whatsoever things are in mind unlike to the heavens, not only if they be in mind and spirit, but also if they be in the body, or about the body: for such an externall cleanness is beleeved not to help a litde to the purity of the mind. For this cause the Pythagorian Philosophers being taken with the desire of Oracles, divine praises being celebrated, did wash themselves in a river as in a bath, & did put on white rayment and linen; for they did account wooll a prophane clothing being the excrements of beasts, and they did inhabit in a pure chamber, and altogether unspotted. In like manner the Bragmanni, the wise men of the Indians were wont to wash themselves naked in a fountain, which is called Dirce in Beotia, their heads being first annointed with amber drops, and odours fit for that purpose; then after they were according to custome sufficiently clean, they were to go forth about noon, clothed in white linen, with a white attire, having rings on their fingers and staves in their hands. In like manner amongst the Gymnosophists it was a custom to wash themselves thrice in a day, and twice in the night, in cold water, before they entred into the holy places. They did also every day use linen garments every day newly washed. We read also of the manner of this kind of washing in Hesiod in his books of works and dayes, where he sings,
Now man being made thus clean becomes celestiall, and spirituall, and is fitted for the sight of and union with God, whilest he ministers to God with a clean body, and pure mind, and delights in the cleanness of all things, as inwards, skin, garments, houses, utensils, oblations, gifts, and sacrifices; the cleanness of all which even purifies the air, and attracts the most pure influence of celestiall, and divine things, and allures the pure ministers of God, and good Demons: although sometimes impure spirits, and ill Demons, as the apes of the good Demons, take upon them this kind of cleanness, that either they may be adored, or may deceive: therefore first of all we must observe that the mind be pure, and the heart pure, and then the impure powers cannot ascend.
Abstinence also doth commonly fortifie, and defend the observers thereof against vices, and evil Demons, and makes the mind an unpolluted temple of God, uniting it to God. For nothing doth more conduce to health, and temperance of the complexion, then not to heap together superfluities, and not to exceed the bounds of necessary food. Neither is nutriment to be taken that is too strong for nature, but rather, let nature be stronger then the meat, as some affirm of Christ, that he took meat in that proportion that it should not breed any excrement of the third concoction. Many others also taking meat sparingly, enjoyed thereby health and agility of body, as Moses, and Elias, who fasted fortie  dayes: whence his face shined, and he lifted up, could easily guide his body as if it were a spirit. For Magicians, and Philosophers affirm that our spirit is not as a terrene thing, or body nourished by nutriment received through certain organs by the concoction of meat, and drink, but draws in their aliment like sponges through the whole body, viz from the thin vapours penetrating the body on all sides. Therefore they that desire to have this spirit pure, and potent, let them use dryer  meats, and extenuate this gross body with fastings, and they make it easily penetrable, and least by the weight thereof, the spirit should either become thick, or be suffocated, let them preserve the body clean by lotions, frictions, exercises, and clothings, and corroborate their spints by lights, and fumes, and bring it to a pure and thin  fineness. We must therefore in taking of meats be pure, and abstinent, as the Pythagorian Philosophers, who keeping a holy and sober table, did protract their life in all temperance. The temperance therefore of life and complexion, because thereby no superfluous humour is bred, which may dull the phantasie, makes, that our soul oftentimes dreaming, and sometimes watching, is alwayes subjected to the superiour influences. Moreover the Pythagorians, if any one doth by abstinence moderate prudently every motion of the mind, and body, promise perpetuall health of both, and long life. So the Bragmani  did admit none to their colledge, but those that were abstinent from wine, from flesh, and vices, saying that none could understand God, but they that emulate him by a divine conversation: which also Phraotes in Philostratus taught the lower Indians. Moreover we must abstain from all those things which infect either the mind, or spirit, as from covetousness, and envy, which are handmaids to injustice (as Hermes saith) enforcing the mind and the hand to evil practices; also from idleness, and luxury; for the soul being suffocated with the body, and lust, cannot foresee any celestiall thing. Wherefore the priests of the Athenians who are called in Greek Hierophantae (as Hierom reports) that they might live more chastly in their sacred employments, and might follow their divine affairs without lust, were wont to castrate themselves by drinking of hemlock. Moreover the chastity of a mind devoted to God doth make our mind (as Orpheus teacheth Museus in the hymne of all the gods) a perpetuall temple of God. Also we must abstain from all multitude and variety of senses, affections, imaginations, opinions, and such like passions, which hurt the mind and pervert the judgement of reason, as we manifestly see in the lascivious, the envious, and ambitious. Wherefore Cicero (in his Tusculans questions) cals these passions the sicknesses of the mind, and the pestiferous diseases thereof. But Horace calls them furies or madness, where he sings,
We must therefore acquit and avert our minds from all multitudes, and such like passions, that we may attain to the simple truth; which indeed many Philosophers are said to have attained to in the solitude of a long time. For the mind by solitude being loosed from all care of humane affairs is at leisure, and prepared to receive the gifts of the celestial dieties. So Moses the law-giver to the Hebrews, and the greatest of prophets, and learned in all the knowledge of the Chaldeans  and Aegyptians, when he would abstract himself from senses, went into the vast wildernesses of Ethiopia, where all humane affairs being laid aside, he applied his mind to the sole contemplation of divine things, in which thing he so pleased the omnipotent God, that he suffered him to see him face to face, and also gave him a wondrous power of miracles, as sacred writ testifies of him. So Zoroastes  the father and prince of the Magicians, is said to attain to the knowledge of all naturall and divine things by the solitude of twenty years, when he wrot, and did very strange things concerning all the art of divining, and soothsaying. The like things do the writings of Orpheus to Museus declare him to have done in the deserts of Thracia. So we read that Epimenides of Crete because learned by a very long sleep, for they say that he slept fifty years, i.e. to have lay hid so long; Pythagoras also in like manner to have layen hid ten years, and Heraclitus, and Democritus for the same cause were delighted with solitariness. For by how much the more we have  the animal and the humane life, by so much the more we live like angels, and God, to which being conjoyned, and brought into a better condition, we have power over all things, ruling over all. Now how our mind is to be separated from an animal life, and from all multitude, and to be erected, untill it ascend to that very one, good, true, and perfect, through each degree of things knowable, and knowledges, Proclus teacheth in his Commentaries upon Alcibiades, shewing how that first sensible things are to be shunned, that we may pass to an incorporeal essence, where we must exceed the order of souls yet multiplied by divers rules, habitudes, and various proportions, many bonds, and a manifold variety of forces, and to strive after an intellect, and intelligible kingdome, and to contemplate how far better these are then souls. Moreover we must bear an intellectual multitude, although united, and individuall, and come to the superintellectual and essential unity, absolute from all multitude, and the very fountain of good, and truth. In like manner we must avoid all knowledge that doth any ways distract, and deceive, that we may obtain the most simple truth. The multitude therefore of affections, senses, imaginations, and opinions is to be left, which in it self is as different, as some things are contrary to others in any subject; and we must ascend to sciences, in which although there be a various multitude, yet there is no contrariety. For all are knit one to the other, and do serve one the other, under one the other, untill they come to one, presupposed by all, and supposing none beyond it; to which all the rest may be referred: yet this is not the highest top of knowledges, but above it is a pure intellect. Therefore all composition, division, and various discourse being laid aside, let us, ascending to the intellectual life, and simple sight, behold the intelligible essence with individual and simple precepts, that we may attain to the highest being of the soul, by which we are one, and under which our multitude is united. Therefore let us attain to the first unity, from whom there is a union in all things, through that one which is as the flower of our essence: which then at length we attain to, when avoyding all multitude we do arise into our very unity, are made one, and act uniformly.
Now the greatest part of purgations is a voluntary penitency for faults: for (as saith Seneca in Thyeste) he whom it grieves that he hath offended, is in a manner innocent. This brings to us the greatest expiation, whilest it opposeth afflictings to delights, and purgeth out of the soul a stupid joyfulness, and gives a certain peculiar power, reducing us to the things above. Penitency therefore is not only a mortification of vices, but a spiritual Martyrdome of the soul; which with the sword of the spirit is on all sides mortified; Now the sword of the spirit is the word of God; whence Jeremiah the Prophet saith, and also Paul, writing to the Ephesians, Cursed is he that with-holdeth his sword from blood; and the Psalmist sings: A sword is in their lips. Therefore our cogitations, affections of our mind, and all evils that proceed from our heart and mouth, must be uttered to the priest in confession, that he may according to the word of God judge those things; and according to the power granted to him by God, penitency being joyned with it, may purifie, '& purge them, & direct them to that which is good; neither is there found in religion for the expiating hainous  offences a stronger Sacrament. Hence the Gods themselves (Ovid in Pontus being witnes),
There is as yet another Sacrament of expiation, viz Almsgiving, of which as I remember I have read very little in Philosophers, but the very truth taught us that, saying, Give ye almes, and all things shall be clean to you; and in Ecclesiasticus it is read; as water extinguisheth fire, so almes doth sin; and Daniel taught the King of Babylon, that he should redeem his sins by almes; and the Angel Raphael testifieth to Tobias; because alms frees from death, and is that which purgeth sins, and make us find eternal life. Hence Christ commanded us to pray to the Father, Forgive as we forgive others, give us as we give to others; of which he said in another place, ye shall receive an hundred fold, and shall possess eternal life. He shall when he comes to judge the quick and the deed, upbraid the wicked above all things for their neglect of almes and works of mercy, when he shall say, I was hungry, and thirsty, and ye gave me neither meat, nor drink; and in another place he speaks of the poor; what ye have done to any one of them ye have done to me. Which Homer also seems to be sensible of, when he brings in a young man wooing Antinoe, saying these words, Antinoe how plausibly hast thou slain a poor begger! he shall destroy thee if God be in heaven; for the Gods themselves being likened to strangers, and guests, go out into the whole world, overturning Cities, and beholding the injuries, and wickednesse of men.
It is believed, and it is delivered by them that are skilful in sacred things, that the mind also may be expiated with certain institutions, and sacraments ministred outwardly, as by sacrifices, baptismes, and adjurations, benedictions, consecrations, sprinklings of holy water, by anoyntings, and fumes, not so much consecrated to this, as having a naturall power thus to do; upon this account sulphur hath a place in Religions, to expiate ill Demons with the fume thereof. An egge also was wont to be used in Purgations; hence eggs are called holy, whence Ovid,
Proclus also writes, that the priests in purifyings were wont to use sulphur, and bitumen, or the washing of sea water: For sulphur purifies by the sharpness of its odour, and sea water by reason of its fiery part; In like manner the hearb  Cinquefoil: wherefore by reason of its purity the ancient priests did use it in purifications, also the boughs of Olives. For these are said to be of so great purity, that they report that an olive tree planted by an harlot is thereby for ever made unfruitfull, or else withers. In like manner, frankincense, myrrhe, vervain, valerian, and the hearb called phu condace to expiation. Also the blessed Clove flower; and the gall of a black dog being fumed is said to be very powerfull in these, as well for expiating of ill spirits, as any bewitchings: also the feathers of a lapwing being fumed, drives away Phantasmes. It is wonderfull, and scarce credible, but that that grave and worthy Author Josephus relates it in his history of Jerusalem, of a root of Baaras, so called from a place neer Machernus, a Town of Judea, being of a yellow colour, that in the night it did shine, and was hard to be taken, that it did oftentimes deceive the hands of them that went to take it, and go out of their sight, never stood still, till the urine of a menstrous woman was sprinkled on it. Neither yet being thus retained, is it pulled up without danger, but suddain death fals upon him that drawes it up, unless he were fortified with an amulet of the said root; which they that want, sacrificing about the earth do bind the root to a dog by a cord, and presently depart: at length the dog with a great deal of pains drawes up the root, and as it were supplying the place of his master presently dies, after which anyone may handle the root without danger; the power of which is much excellent in expiations, as is manifest for the delivery of those that are vexed with unclean spirits; now that these kind of matters should act upon spirituall substances by putting them to flight, or by alluring them, or mitigating them, or by inciting them, they are of no other opinion then that the fire of Sicilia acts upon souls: which (William of Paris being witness) not hurting the bodies, doth most intolerably torment the souls of them that are neer. But of those in part we have treated before.
Adorations, and vowes, sacrifices, and oblations are certain degrees in sacred things to find out God, and those things which principally provoke the divine pleasure, and procure a sacred and indissolvable communion of God with souls; for by prayers which we utter with true and sacred words, sensibly, and affectionately, we obtam a great power, when by the application of them to any diety  we do so far move it, that he may direct his speech and answer by a divine way, by which (as saith Dionysius) God speaks with men, but so occultly that very few perceive it. But oftentimes that King and Prophet David perceives it, when he saith, I will hear what the Lord will speak in me. Adoration therefore being a long time continued, and often frequented, perfects the intellect, and makes the soul more large for the receiving of divine lights, inflaming divine love, producing faith, hope, and sacred manners, purifieth the soul from all contrariety, and what is any away adverse to it, and doth also repell divers evils, which would otherwise naturally fall out. Hence Ovid sings,
Now man is returned to God by prayers, by which coming he (saith Plato in Phedrus ) stops horses, and enters into the chambers of repose, where he feeds upon Ambrosia, and drinks Nectar. Therefore they that desire to enjoy any vertue, must pray, and supplicate often to him who hath all vertue in himself. Now that is the best prayer, which is not uttered in words, but that which with a Religious silence and sincere cogitation is offered up to God, and that which with the voice of the mind and words of the intellectuall world, is offered to him. Now a vow is an ardent affection of a chast  mind given up to God, which by vowing wisheth that which seems good. This affection (as Iamblichus, and Proclus testifie) doth so joyn the soul to God, that the operation of the mind and of God is one; viz of God as an artificer, of the mind as a divine instrument: all antiquity testifies that by vowes sometimes miracles are done, diseases are cured, tempests are diverted, and such like. Hence we read that the most excellent and wise in all nations, the Bragmanni  of the Indians, the Magicians of the Persians, the Gymnosopists  of the Aegyptians, the divines of the Greeks, and Caldeans  which did excell in divine secrets, did apply themselves to divine vowes, and prayers, and thereby did effect many wonderfull things. Now to the perfection of a vow, and adoration (for a vow cannot be perfect without an adoration, nor an adoration without a vow) there are two things especially required, viz First the knowledge of the thing to be adored, and to which we must vow, and in what manner, and order, and by what Mediums it must be worshiped; for there are various cooperators and instruments of God, viz The heavens, Stars, administring spirits, the celestiall souls, and Heros, which we must implore as porters, interpreters, administrators, mediators, but first of all him, who goeth to the Archetype God, who only is the utmost term of adoration; the other dieties  are as it were passages to that very God. Know therefore that adorations and vowes must with a pure and pious mind be principally made to that one only God, the highest father, King and Lord of all the gods. But when they shall come before to the inferiour gods, let the intention of the administration be terminated in them; therefore to adorations, and vowes, when they be directed to the inferiour dieties, Zoroastes, and Orpheus thought fitting that suffumigations and characters should be used; but when they are erected to the majesty of the supream  God, they must not in any wise; which also Hermes, and Plato forbid to be done. Whence Hermes to Tatius; This (saith he) is like to sacrilege when thou prayest to God to be willing to kindle frankincense, and such like; for (saith Porphyrie ) they are not agreeable to piety. For there is not any materiall thing can be found, which to the immateriall God is not unclean. Therefore neither is that prayer which is uttered by words agreeable to him, nor that prayer which is mentall, if the mind be polluted with vice; Secondly there is also required a certain assimilation of our life to the divine life, in purity, chastity and holiness, with a lawfull desire of that which we wish for; for by this means we especially obtain the divine benevolence, and are subjected to the divine bounty; for unlesse we, having our minds purged, be worthy to be heard, and also those things which we desire, be worthy to be done, it is manifest that the gods will not hearken to our prayers; whence divine Plato saith, that God cannot be bound by our prayers or gifts to do unjust things; therefore let us desire nothing of God, which we think uncomely to wish for: for by this means only, we see that very many are frustrated of their prayers and vowes, because that neither they themselves are Religiously disposed, nor are their desires and prayers made for those things which are well pleasing to God, neither do they know to discern in what order they ought to pray, and through what mediatours they ought to go to God; the ignorance of which doth very oft reduce our prayers and supplications to nothing, and causeth our desires and wishes to be denied.
A sacrifice is an oblation which is both holy by offering, and sanctifieth and maketh Holy the offerer, unless either Irreverence or some other sin be an impediment to him; therefore these sacrifices and oblations do yeld  us much hope, and make us of the family of God, and do repel from us many evils hanging over our heads, which the doctors of the Hebrews do especially confirm, saying by this that we kill our living creatures, and dissipate our wealth by sacrifice, we turn away mischiefs which do hang over us: for as this mortall priest sacrificeth in this inferior world the soul of irrational creatures to God, by the separating of the body from the soul: so Michael the Archangel the priest of the higher world, sacrificeth the souls of men, and this by the separation of the soul from the body, and not of the body from the soul, unless perchance, as it happeneth in fury, Rapture, Extasie  and sleep, and such like vacations of the soul, which the Hebrews call the death of the body. But sacrifices & oblations are first of all and principally to be offered up to the most high God; but when they are to be directed to the secondary divine powers, this ought to be done even as we have spoken concerning prayers and vows: but there are many kinds of sacrifices: one kind is called a burnt offering, when the thing sacrificed was consumed by fire; another, is an offering for the effusion of blood; moreover there are salutiferous sacrifices which are made for the obtaining of health, others pacifying for obtaining peace, others praising for the freeing from some evill, and for the bestowing of some good thing; others Gratulatory, for divine worship and thanksgiving; but some sacrifices are made neither for the honor of God, nor out of good will, of which sort was that amongst the Hebrews, called the sacrifice of Jealousie, which was made only for the detecting of occult adultery. There was in times past amongst the Gentiles the sacrifice of expiation, by the which cities were purged from famine, pestilence, or some horrible calamity; whose rites were to search out the most wicked man in that city, and to lead him to the place appointed carrying in his hands a cheese and wafers and dry figs; afterwards to whip him seven times with Rods, and then to burn him to ashes with the same rods, and to cast the ashes into the sea; of these Lycophron and Hipponax make mention; neither doth Philostratus relate things much different from these, concerning Apollonius of Tiana  while he chased away the Pestilence from Ephesus. Moreover there were many kind of sacrifices and offerings, as Agonalia, Dapsa, Farreationes, Hecatombe, Hostia, Hyacinthia, Armilustra, Janualia, Lucalia, Lupercalia, Munychia, Novendinalia, Nyctiluca, Palatialia, Pastillaria, Popularia, Protervia, Scenopegia, Solitaurilia, Stata, Rubigalia, Fontanalia, Ormia, Parentalia, Inferiae, Consualia, Lampteria, Amburbia, Ambarvalia, Vivalia, Thyia, Holocaustomata, Orgia, Latialia, Dianetaurica, Bacchanalia, Trieterica, Liberalia, Cocytia, Cerealia, Thesmophoria, Adonia, Teonia, Laurentalia, Opalia, Palilia, Quirinalia, Vertumnalia, Gynaecia, Panathenea, Quinquatria, Diapalia, Diasia, Horma, Hormea, Nemea, Mytriaca, Palogygia. And the offerings of these were proper and divers; for a Goat and an Ass were sacrificed to Bacchus, a Sow to Ceres, an horse to the Sun, an hart and dogs to Diana, an Ass to Priapus, a Goose to Isis, a dunghil-cock to the Night, a she-Goate to Faunus, a Bull to Neptune, a she-Goate to Minerva, a Bull to Hercules, a child to Saturn, a Sow with piggs to Maja, a Cock to Aesculapius: moreover they did sacrifice to Hercules Gnidius with scouldings and railings; there were also divers orders of Priests, as high priests, Flamines, Archiflamines, Phylades, Saelians, Hierophantes, & diverse names of religions, and superstitions, and sacrifices, ceremonies, feasts, consecrations, dedications, vowes, devotions, expiations, oathes, offerings, satisfactory works; by the which the seduced gentiles did sacrifice to false Gods and devils; but the true sacrifice, which purgeth any man, and uniteth him to God, is twofold; one which the high priest Christ offered for the remission of sins, purifying all things by the blood of his cross; the other, by the which a man offereth up himself clean, unspotted, for a living sacrifice to God, as Christ the high priest offered himself, and taught us to be offered together with him, as he was offered, saying of the sacrament of his body, and blood, Do this in remembrance of me; viz that we should offer our selves together, being mortified by the passion of his mortal body, and quickned in spirit; of the which Porphyry saith, Let us labor to offer up holines of life for a sacrifice; for no man can be a good priest of God, but he which bringeth forth himself for a sacrifice, and buildeth up his own soul, as it were for an Image, and doth constitute both his mind, and understanding for a Temple in the which he may receive the divine light; but eternal sacrifices (as Heraclitus saith) are certain cures of the soul, instituted by the most High Physician; for the evill spirit possesseth a man (as Proclus saith) even untill he be expiated by sacrifices; therefore sacrifices are required to pacifie  God and the Heavenly powers, and to expiate a man, who beareth the Image both of God and the world; But our Lord Iesus  Christ the true high priest concluded all sacrifices in bread and wine only, as in the primary substance of mans meat, needing further the offering up of no animals, nor other things, or the effusion of blood, in which we may be cleansed, being perfectly cleansed in his blood. There were also amongst the Aegyptians six hundred sixty six  kinds of sacrifices; for they did appoynt  divine honors, and holy sacrifices to each star, and planet, because they were divine animals partaking of an intellectual soul and a divine mind; whence they say that the stars being humbly prayed unto, do hear our prayer, and bestow celestial gifts, not so much by any natural agreement, as by their own free will. And this is that which Iamblicus saith, that celestial bodies, and the dieties  of the world have certain divine and superior powers in themselves, as also natural and inferior, which Orpheus calls the keyes to open and shut; and that by those we are bound to the fatall influences, but by these to loose us from fate. Whence if any misfortune hang over any one from Saturn, or from Mars, the Magicians command that he must not forthwith fly to Jupiter, or Venus, but to Saturn or Mars themselves. So that Apuleian Psyche who was persecuted by Venus for equalling her in beauty, was forced to importune for favor, not from Ceres, or Juno, but from Venus her self. Now they did sacrifice to each star with the things belonging to them; to the Sun with solary things, and its animals, as a Laurel tree, a Cock, a Swan, a Bull; to Venus with her animals, as a Dove, or turtle, and by her plants, as Vervain; as Virgil sings,
Moreover the Magicians when they made any confection either natural, or artificial, belonging to any star, this did they afterward religiously offer, and sacrifice to the same star, receiving not so much a natural vertue from the influence thereof being opportunely received, as by that religious oblation receiving it divinely confirmed and stronger. For the oblation of any thing, when it is offered to God after a right manner, that thing is sanctified by God by the oblation as is a sacrifice, and is made part thereof. Moreover to the celestial and etherial Gods white sacifices were offered; but to the terestial  or infernal, black: but to the terrestial  upon the altars, but to the infernal in ditches; to the aerial and watery, flying things: But to these white, to those black. Finally, to all the Gods and Demons besides terrestrial and infernal, flying things were offered, but to those only four-footed animals, for like rejoyceth in like. Of these only which were offered to the celestial, and etherial, it is lawfull to eat, the extream  parts being reserved for God, but of the other not. Now all these the Oracle of Apollo hath expressed in these verses,
These doth Porphyry make mention of in his book of answers, to whom the rest assent. For they say that these sacrifices are certain natural Mediums betwixt the Gods and men; which Aristotle affirming saith, that to sacrifice to God is in a man naturally. They are therefore they say, Mediums, which favor of the nature of both, and represent divine things analogically, and have with the diety  to whom they are offered, certain convenient analogies, but so occult that a mans understanding can scarce conceive of them, which God, and the Dieties  require in particular for our expiation with which the celestial vertues are pleased, and withhold themselves from execution of the punishment which our sins deserve. And these are (as Orpheus calls them) keys which open the gate of the elements and the heavens, that by them a man may ascend to the supercelestials; and the intelligences of the heavens, and the demons of the elements may descend to him. Now men that are perfect, and truly Religious need them not, but only they, who (saith Trismegistus) being fallen into disorder, are made the servants of the heavens and creatures; who because they are subjected to the heavens, therefore think they may be corroborated by the favour of the celestiall vertue, untill they flying higher be acquitted from their presidency, and become more sublime then they.
Now let us see what imprecations they did joyn to oblations and sacrifices; for he that did offer any sacrifice to God, did say these, or the like things: I thy servant do offer and sacrifice these things to thee; I confesse that thou art the author of all sanctity, and I call upon thee to sanctifie this oblation, that thou wouldst pour upon it the vertue of thy high and excellent spirit, that by it we may oblain what we ask for. Moreover also as this thing present by any oblations is made thine, as to live, or die to thee, so also let me be made thine who by this oblation, and communion, by this thing which I come to offer, and sacrifice to thee, profess to be one of thy family, and worshippers. Besides in offerings it was said, As that animal is in my power to be slain, if I pleased, or to be saved: so it is in thy power to take away in wrath, or to give in love that which we desire. Lastly, when for expiation, or the avoyding of any evil, any sacrifice was to be made, it was said, As that animall dies in my hand, so die all vice in me, also all uncleanness, or so let die and be annihilated such or such an evil, or discommodity. Also, As the blood of this animal is poured forth out of its body, so let all vice and uncleanness flow out from me. In sacrifices laid on the altar to be burnt, it was said, as this oblation is consumed by this present fire, so that nothing remains of it; so let all evel be consumed in me, or let such or such an evil which we would repell and avoyd be consumed. It was also a custom when imprecation was made, to touch the altar with the hands of all those for whom such a sacrifice was made, or of them who did desire to be partakers of it, because prayer only cannot prevail, unless he thai prays toucheth the altar with his hands; whence in Virgil,
Every Adoration therefore, oblation, or sacrifice, deprecation, invocation, are differenced thus, viz either because they are made to God only, or to inferiour dieties, as angels, Stars, Heroes. In these therefore such rules are to be observed, that when any prayer is to be offered to God alone for the obtaining of any effect, it must be done with the commemoration of some work, miracle, sacrament, or promise, taken somewhere out of Scripture; as if there be a deprecation made for the destruction of enemies, let it be commemorated that God destroyed the Giants in the deluge of waters, and the builders of Babel in the confusion of tongues, Sodom, and Gomorrha in raining of fire, the host of Pharaoh in the Red-sea, and the like; adding to those some malediction out of the Psalms, or such as may be gathered out of other places of scripture. In like manner when we are to deprecate against dangers of waters, let us commemorate the saving of Noah in the flood; the passing of the children of Israel through the Red-sea, and Christ walking dryshod upon the waters, and saving a ship from shipwrack, commanding the winds and waves, and lifting up Peter sinking in the waves of the sea, and such like. But if a prayer be necessary for obtaining Oracles, or dreames, whether it be to God, Angels, or Heros, there are many places offer themselves out of the old testament, where God is said to talk with men, promising in very many places Presages, and Revelations, besides the propheticall dreams of Jacob, Joseph, Pharaoh, Daniel, Nebuchadnezzar, in the old Testament, and the Revelation of John, Paul, in the new; also of holy Magicians, as Helen, Constantine and Charles; also of later Prophets, as Methedius, Cyrillus, Joachim, Merlin, Brigitta, Mechtindis, Hildegardis, the dieties  of whom being piously invocated, render us oftentimes partakers of divine Revelations. Moreover we must invocate the sacred names of God, but those especially, which are significative of the thing desired, or any way applicable to it; as for the destruction of enemies we must invocate the name of Gods wrath, of the revenge of God, fear of God, justice of God, fortitude of God: but for the avoiding of any danger we most invocate the names of pity, defence, salvation, goodness, and the like. Moreover we must petition for and to the effecters of the thing desired, viz such an Angel, Star or Heroe on whom that office lies, but observing that our invocation on them must be made with due number, weight, and measure, and according to the rules delivered concerning inchantments. For betwixt these there is no difference, but that inchantments are such as affect our mind, disposing the Passions thereof into a conformity to certain dieties; but prayers are such as are exhibited to any diety  by way of worship, and veneration; and from the same root also may the manner of consecrations be taken, of which we shall in the next place speak.
Consecration is a lifting up of experiments, by which a spiritual soul, being drawn by proportion and conformity, is infused into the matter of our works according to the tradition of Magicall art rightly and lawfully prepared, and our work is vivified by the spirit of understanding. The efficacy of consecrations is perfected by two things especially, viz the vertue of the person himself consecrating, and the vertue of the prayer it self. In the person himself is required holinesse of life, and a power to consecrate; the former, nature and desert perform; the latter is acquired by imitation, and dignification, of which we have spoken elsewhere. Then it is necessary that he that sacrificeth must know this vertue and power in himself, with a firm and undoubted faith. Now what things are required in prayer, are these. There is also a certain power of sanctifying placed in it by God, as if it be so ordained of God for this or that very thing (of which sort we read of many in the holy writ) or instituted to this or that thing, by the vertue of the holy ghost, according to the ordination of the Church, of which sort are many every where extant: or this holiness is in the prayer it selfe, not by vertue of institution, but of the commemoration of sacred things, as of sacred letters, histories, nriracles, works, effects, favours, promises, sacraments and such sacramentall things, which shall seem to cohere with the thing to be consecrated, either properly, or improperly, or analogically. And of these we shall now give some examples, by which a way easily may be laid open to the whole consideration of it. So in the consecrating of water there is this comemoration made, viz because God placed the firmament in the middle of waters; because in the middle of the earthly paradise he made a holy fountain, from which through four rivers the whole Earth is watered: because he made the waters an instrument of his justice, in the destruction of the Giants, by the generall deluge over the whole earth: and in the destruction of the Army of Pharaoh in the Red Sea, and because he led the people dry-shod through the middle of the Red sea, and through the middle of Jordan, and because he brought water miraculously out of a rock of the wilderness; and brought forth a fountain of living water out of the jaw bone of an asse at the prayers of Sampson, and because he appointed the waters as an instrument of his pity, and of salvation for remission of sins: and because Christ being baptized in Jordan, purified and sanctified the waters; and the like also by invocating divine names sutable  to these things, as when God is called a living fountain, living water, a living river. In like manner in consecration of fire, let there be a commemoration that God created the fire to be an instrument of his justice for punishment, revenge, purgation of sins, and when he comes to judge the world he will command burning to go before; and he appeared to Moses in a burning bush, went before the children of Israel in a pillar of fire, and commanded that inextinguishable fire should be kept in the tabernacle of the Covenant, & kept fire unextinguished under the water. Also we must use such divine names as offer themselves, as because God is a consuming fire, and a melting fire: and such as are proper to these, as the shining of God, the light of God, the brightness of God, and such like. So in the consecration of oil such solemnities must be commemorated as belong to these, as in Exodus the oil of unction & sweet perfumes, and sacred names sutable  to these, such as is the name Christ, which signifies annointed, and such as this, and that in the Apocalypse concening the two olive trees distilling sanctified oil into lamps burning in the presence of God. So in the consecration of places let there be commemoration made of mount Sinai, of the Tabernacle of the Covenant, of the sanctum sanctorum, the temple of Solomon, and of the sanctification of the hill Golgotha through the mystery of the passion of Christ, and of the field which was bought with the price of Christs blood; also of mount Tabor, where the transfiguration and ascent into heaven was. Sacred names also being used as of the place of God, the throne of God, the chair of God, the tabernacle of God, the altar of God, the seat of God, and the habitation of God, and of such like.
After the same manner we must proceed in the benediction of other things, by enquiring  into holy writ by divine names, and profession of Religion for such things which may seem to be after a manner sutable  to this or that thing. As for example, if there be a paper, or a book having some of the mysteries which we should commemorate, as the tables of the ten commandments given to Moses on mount Sinai, and the sanctification of the law, and of the Prophets, and Scriptures promulgated by the holy spirit: and let the divine names of the testament of God, the book of God, the book of life, the knowledge of God, the wisdom of God, and of such like be commemorated.
So if a sword be to be consecrated, we may remember out of the second of Maccabees there was a sword sent from God to Judas Macchabeus, that he should destroy the children of Israels enemies: also that in the prophets, "Take unto you two edged swords"; also in the Gospel, coats being sold, swords must he bought; and in the History of David an Angel was seen hiding a bloody sword; and many such like we shall find in the Prophets, and Apocalyps, as also the sacred names of the sword of God, the rod of God, the staff of God, the vengeance of God, and such like. And now let these things which have been exemplified concerning real consecrations, and benedictions suffice: by which personall consecrations, and benedictions may easily be understood. But there is yet another powerfull and efficacious rite of consecrating, and expiating, which is of the kinds of superstitious, viz: when the rite of any sacrament is transsumed to another thing, which is intended to be consecrated, or expiated, as the rite of baptisme, confirmation, funerall, and such like. Moreover we must know, that a vow, oblation, and sacrifice, have a certain power of consecration, as well reall as personall, as the things or persons are vowed or offered.
Now those things are called sacred, which are made holy by the gods themselves, or their Demons, being (as I may say) dedicated to us by the gods themselves. By this account we call Demons holy, because in them God dwells, whose name they are often said to hear. Whence it is read in Exodus: I will send my Angel who shall go before thee; observe him, neither think that he is to be despised, because my name is in him. So also mysteries are called sacred. For a mystery is that which hath a holy and an occult vertue, and favour given by the gods or Demons, or dispensed by the most high God himself; such as are those sacred names and Characters, which have been spoken of. So the crosse is called holy and mysterious, being made so by the passion of Jesus Christ. Hence also certain prayers are called holy, and mysticall, which are not instituted by the devotion of man, but by divine Revelation, as we read in the Gospel that Christ instituted the Lords prayer. In like manner certain confections are called holy, into which God hath put the especiall beam of his vertue, as we read in Exodus of the sweet perfume, and oil of anointing, and as with us there is a sacred fountain, and a sacred ointment; There is also another kind of holiness, whereby we call those things holy which are dedicated and consecrated by man to God, as vows, and sacrifices, of which we have spoken already: Whence Virgil,
Hence divine Plato in his eleventh book of Lawes, commanded that the sacred Images and Statues of the Gods should be honoured, not for themselves, but because they represent the Gods to us, even as the ancients did worship that Image of Jupiter, thus interpreting it: for in that he bares the resemblance of a man, was signified that he is a mind which produceth all things by his seminary power; he is feigned to sit, that his immutable and constant power might he expressed; he hath the upper parts bare and naked, because he is manifest to the intelligences and the superiors; but the lower parts are covered, because he is hid ftom the inferior creatures: he holdeth a scepter in his left hand, because in these parts of the body the most spiritual habitation of life is found. For the Creator of the intellect is the King and the vivifying spirit of the world; but in his right hand he holdeth forth both an Eagle and victory; the one, because he is Lord of all the Gods, as the Eagle is of other birds; the other, because all things are subject to him; in like manner we also reverence the Image of a Lamb, because it representeth Christ, and the picture of a Dove, because it signifieth the holy Ghost, and the forms of a Lion, Oxe, Eagle, and a man, signifying the Evangelists, and such like things, which we find expressed in the Revelations of the Prophets, and in divers places of the holy Scripture: moreover those things confer to the like revelations and dreams, and therefore are called sacred pictures; there are also sacred rites and holy observations, which are made for the reverencing of the Gods, and religion, viz devout gestures, genuflexions, uncoverings of the head, washings, sprinklings of Holy water, perfumes, exterior expiations, humble processions, and exterior Ornaments for divine praises, as musical Harmony, burning of wax candles and lights, ringing of bells, the adorning of Temples, Altars and Images, in all which there is required a supream and special reverence and comeliness; wherefore there are used for these things, the most excellent, most beautifull and pretious  things, as gold, silver, pretious stores, and such like: which reverences and exterior rites are as it were lessons and invitations to spiritual sacred things, for the obtaining the bounty of the Gods; concerning which Proserpina beareth witness in these verses,
And the primitive Church did use certain holy incantations against diseases and tempests, which we either pronounce praying to some divine powers, or also sometimes carrying them along with us, written and hanging on our neck, or bound to us, we obtain very oft some power from such a Saint, which men very much admire; by this means also there are sacred names, figures, Characters, and seals, which contemplative men, in purity of mind, for their secret vows, have devoted, dedicated and consecrated to the worship of God; which things truly, if any man afterwards shall pronounce with the same purity of mind, with the which they were first instituted, he shall in like manner do miracles; further also, the manner and rules delivered by the first institutor must be observed, for they who are ignorant of these things, loose their labour, and work in vain; Thus not only by barbarous words, but also by Hebrew, Aegyptian, Greek, Latine, and the names of other languages, being devoted to God, and attributed and dedicated to his essence, power or operation, we sometimes do wonders; such names there are in Iamblicus, viz Osyris, Icton, Emeph, Ptha, Epies, Amun; so in Plato, and amongst the Greeks,', so the Greeks call Jupiter  which signifieth to live, because he giveth life to all things; in like manner  which signifieth through, because through him are all things made, so, which signifieth Immortall; so amongst the Latines he is called Jupiter, as it were an adjuvant father, and such like, and also certain names are devoted to men, as Eutychis, Sophia, Theophilus, that is, prosperous, servant, dear to God. In like manner certain materiall things receive no little sanctity and vertue by consecration, especially if done by a priest, as we see those waxen seals, in which are imprinted the figure of Lambs, to receive vertue by the benediction of the Romane High priest, against lightnings and tempests, that they cannot hurt those who carry them, for a divine vertue is inspired into Images thus consecrated, and is contained in them, as it were in a certain sacred Letter, which hath the Image of God; the like vertue those holy waxed lights receive at Easter, and at the feast of the purification of the virgins; in like manner bells by consecration and benediction receive vertue, that they drive away and restrain lightnings, and tempests, that they hurt not in those places where their sounds are heard; in like manner salt and water, by their benedictions and exorcismes receive power to chase and drive away evil spirits; and thus in things of this kind, there are also sacred times alwaies observed by the nations of every religion with very great reverence, which are either commanded that we should sanctify by the Gods themselves, or are dedicated to them by our fore-fathers and Elders, for the commemoration of some benefit received of the Gods, and for a perpetual Thanksgiving. Thus the Hebrews have received their Sabbaths, and the Heathens their holy daies, and we the solemn dayes of our holy rites, alwaies to be reverenced with the Highest solemnity; there are also times contrary to these, which they call penitential, and we black dayes, because that in those daies the commomwealth hath suffered some notable blow, and calamity, of which sort amongst the Romans was the day before the fourth nones of August, because that on that day they suffered that extraordinary blow at the Battle of Canna. In like manner all Postriduan daies are called black dayes, because that most commonly battles succeeded ill on these dayes: So amongst the Jews the black dayes are the seventeenth day of June, because on that day Moses brake the Tables, Manasses erected an Idol in the Sanctum Sanctorum, & the walls of Jerusalem are supposed to have been pulled down by their Enemies; likewise the ninth of July is a black day with them, because on that day the destructions of both the Temples happened, by this neason they are called Ægyptian  dayes, in the old time observed by the Ægyptians, and every Nation by this way may easily make a like calculation of days fortunate or unfortunate to them, and the Magicians command that these holy and religious daies be observed no less then the planetary daies, and the celestial dispositions; for they affirm that they are far more efficacious, especially to obtain spiritual and divine vertues, because that their vertue is not from the Elements and celestial bodies, but descendeth from the intelligible and supercelestial world, and being helped by the common suffrages of the Saints, is not infringed by any adverse disposition of the heavenly bodies, nor frustrated by the corruptible contagion of the Elements, if so be that firm belief and religious worship be not wanting, that is, joyned with fear and trembling, for religion properly holdeth forth thus much; Hence those daies are called religious, which to violate is a sin, which if we carefully observe, we fear not any great mischief, which we may do, if we do otherwise.
Whosoever therefore thou art, who disirest  to operate in this faculty, in the first place implore God the Father, being one, that thou also maiest he one worthy of his favour, be clean, within and without, in a clean place, because it is written in Leviticus, Every man who shall approach those thing which are consecrated, in whom there is uncleanness, shall perish before the Lord; Therefore wash your selves oft, and at the daies appointed, according to the mysteries of number, put on clean clothes, and abstain from all uncleanness, pollution, and lust; for the Gods will not hear that man (as Porphyry saith) who hath not abstained many dayes from venereous Acts; Be not thou coupled to a polluted or menstruous woman, neither to her who hath the Hemorhoides, touch not an unclean thing; nor a Carkass, whence Porphyry saith, whosoever shall touch a dead man, may not approach the Oracles, perhaps, because that by a certain affinity of the funeral ill odour, the mind is corrupted and made unfit to receive divine influences; Thou shalt wash, and anoynt, and perfume thy self, and shalt offer sacrifices: for God accepteth for a most sweet odour those things which are offered to him by a man purified and well disposed, and together with that perfume condescendeth to your prayer and oblation, as the Psalmist singeth; Let my prayer, O Lord, be directed to thee, as incense in thy sight; Moreover, the soul being the offspring and Image of God himself, is delighted in these perfumes and odours, receiving them by those nostrils, by the which it self also entred into this corporeal man, and by the which (as Job testifieth) the most lively spirits are sometimes sent forth, which cannot be retained in mans heart, boyling  either through choler, or labor; whence some think that the faculty of smelling is the most lively and spiritual of all the senses. Further, perfumes, sacrifice, and unction penetrate all things, and open the gates of the Elements and of the Heavens, that through them a man can see the secrets of God, Heavenly things, and those things which are above the Heavens, and also those which descend from the Heavens, as Angels, and spirits of deep pits, and profound places, apparations of desart  places, and doth make them to come to you, to appear visibly, and obey you; and they pacify all spirits, and attract them as the Loadstone Iron, and joyn them with the elements, and cause the spirits to assume bodies: for truly the spiritual body is very much incrassated by them, and made more gross: for it liveth by vapours, perfumes and the odours of sacrifices: moreover whatsoever thou operatest, do it with an earnest affection and hearty desire; that the goodness of the Heavens and heavenly bodies may favour thee, whose favour, that thou maiest more easily obtain, the fitness of the place, time, profession, custome, diet, habite, exercise and name also do wonderfully conduce: for by these the power of nature is not only changed, but also overcome, for a fortunate place conduceth much to favour: neither without cause did the Lord speak to Abraham that he should come into the land which he would shew him; and Abraham arose and journeyed towards the south: in like manner, Isaac went to Gerarath, where he sowed & gathered an hundred fold, and waxed very rich: but what place is congruous to each one, must he found out by his nativity, which thing he that knoweth not, let him observe where his spirits are especially recreated, where his senses are more lively, where the health of his body and his strength is most vigorous, where his businesses succeed best, where most favour him, where his enemies are overthrown, let him know that this region, this place is preordained by God and his Angels for him; and is also well disposed, and prepared by the Heavens. Therefore reverence this place, and change it according to your time and business, but alwayes flie an unfortunate place: fortunate names also make things more fortunate: but unfortunate, unhappy; Hence the Romans in lifting their souldiers  were wary, least that the first souldiers names should be in any measure unfortunate; and for paying tributaries, and mustrings of their Armies and Colonies, they did chuse Censours with good names. Moreover they believed, that if unfortunate names were changed into fortunate, that the fortune of things would also be changed into better; So Epidamnus, least that sea men going that way should suffer damage, they commanded to be called Dyrachius; for the same cause they called Maleoton, least he should cause some mischief, Beneventus; but they thought good to call Lacus, Lucrinus, for the goodness of the name being the most happy place of all: make election also of hours and dayes for thy operations, for not without cause our Saviour spake, Are there not twelve hours in the day, and so forth? for the Astrologers teach that times can give a certain fortune to our businesses; the Magicians likewise have observed, and to conclude, all the ancient wise men consent in this, that it is of very great concernment; that in what moment of time, and disposition of the heavens, every thing, whether naturall or Artificiall hath received its being in this world; for they have delivered, that the first moment hath so great power, that all the course of fortune dependeth thereon, and may be foretold thereby, and in like manner, by the successes of the fortune of every thing, they both firmly believed, and experience also testifieth, that the beginning of any thing may thereby be found out; even as Sulla the Astrologian foretold, that a most certain destruction approached Caligula, who asked him advice concerning his nature; Metheon the Astrologer foresaw the calamity of the wars which happened afterward to the Athenians, making an expedition against the Syracusans: to the same about to sail to Sicilia, Meson the Astrologer foretold a great tempest. Anaxagoras by the knowledge of the times, forewarned on what dayes a great stone should fall from the Sun; as afterward it happened at Aegos, a river of Thracia; on the contrary, L. Tarnucius Firmianus by the acts and fortune of Romulus, found both the time of his conception and nativity; the same man found out also the nativity of the City of Rome, by making the successes and fortunes of that City: so Maternus reporteth, that the beginning and Creation even of this world was found out by the events of things: For that times can do very much in naturall things, may be manifested by many examples; for there are trees, which after the Solstice do invert their leaves, as the Poplar, Elm, Olive, Linetree, whitewillow; and shelfishes, Crabs and Oisters  do increase, the Moon increasing, and when the Moon decreaseth, do grow lean; & the Seas in ebbing and flowing do observe the motions and times of the Moon; and Euripus in Euboea, doth it not seven times with wonderfull swiftness ebbe and flow? and three dayes in every moneth, viz the. '. and. day of the Moon it standeth still; and amongst the Troglotides there is a lake, which thrice in a day is made bitter and salt, and again sweet; moreover in the winter time, when all things wither and dry, Penyroyall  flourisheth: on the same day, they say, that blown bladders do break, and that the leaves of Sallows and Pomegranats are turned and forced about; and its known to all, that which I have seen both in France and Italy, and I know also the sowing thereof, viz that a nut-tree, which seemeth dry all the year, on the Even of Saint Johns day doth produce both leaves, and flowres, and ripe fruits: and this miracle doth wholly consist in the observation of the time of its sowing: moreover that times can yield some wonderfull power to artificiall things, the Astrologers in their books of Elections and Images do constantly affirm; and by this means, we read in Plutarch, That there was an image amongst the Peleneans made with such art, that what way soever it did look, it did strike all things with terrour and very great perturbation, so that no man durst through fear behold it; and we read in the life of Apollonius, that the Magicians of Babylon had tied to the roof of their house, four golden fowls, which they called the tongues of the gods; and that they had power to reconcile the minds of the multitude to the love and obedience of the King. In the Iland  Chios there was the face of Diana placed on high, whose countenance appeared sad to those which caine in, but to those that went out, it appeared chearfull: In Troas, the sacrifices which were left about the Image of Minerva did not putrifie; In the temple of Venus at Paphos, it never rained in the court: If any thing was taken forth from the Tomb of Antheus, showers were powred down from heaven till that which was digged up, was restored into its place: In the tomb of King Bibria of Pontus, did arise a Laurell, from which if any one did break a branch and carry it on shipboard, quarrells would never cease untill it was thrown over. In the Iland  Boristhenes, no bird did haunt the house of Achilles: at Rome, neither flie, nor dog did enter into the Palace of Hercules, in the oxe market. In Olynthus of Thracia there was a place, into the which if a Beetle had fallen, it could not get forth, but writhing it self every way it died; I could bring even innumerable examples, and far more wonderfull then these, which Antiquity reporteth to have been done by the Art of images, and by the observation of times: but least any one should think them long since, obsolete, and repute them for fables, I will bring more new things, and such as remain even to this time in some places, and I will joyn to these some artificiall wonders; for they say, that by the Art of images it cometh to passe, that at Byzantine Serpents hurt not, and that Jackdaws flie  not over within the wals; that in Crete there are no night Owls, that about Naples Grasshoppers are never heard; that at Venice, no kind of flie  doth enter the publike  houses of Barbers, that in Toledo in the publike shambles, one only flie is seen all the year long, of a notable whiteness: and we in the foregoing book have declared already both the fashions and times, by the observation of which, these things and such like may be done; moreover you ought especially to observe the vertue of speeches and words, for by these the soul is spread forth into inferiour substances, into stones, metals, plants, animals, and all naturall things, imprinting divers figures and passions on them, inforcing all creatures, or leading and drawing them by a certain affection: So Cato testifieth, that weary Oxen are refreshed by words, and also that by prayers and words, you may obtain of Tellus, that it produce unusuall trees; trees also may by this means be entreated to pass over to another place, and to grow in another ground: Rapes grow the greater, if they be entreated when they are sown, to be beneficiall to them, their family, and neighbours; the Peacock also being commended, presently extends his feathers: but on the contrary, it is found by experience that the hearb  Basill, being sown with cursings and railings, is more flourishing; also a kind of Lobster doth cure burnings and scaldings, if so be that in the mean time his name be not named: further, they which use witchcraft, kill trees by praising them, & thus do hurt sown Corn and children: moreover they say that there is so great power in mans execrations, that they chase and banish even wicked spirits: Eusebius declareth that by this means Serapis amongst the Ægyptians, did publish short sentences, by the which devils were expelled, and he taught also, how devils having assumed the forms of brute beasts, do ensnare men: To conclude, in all businesses, put God before your eyes, for it is written in Deuteronomie, When you shall seek the Lord your God, you shall find him. Whence we read in Mark, That whatsoever ye shall desire and pray for, believing that you shall receive it, it shal come to pass for you; and in Matthew, If you shall have faith as a grain of mustard seed, nothing shall be impossible for you; also the fervent prayer of a righteous man prevaileth much, for Elias (as James saith) was a man like unto us, subject unto passions, and he prayed earnestly, that it might not rain upon the earth, and it rained not in three yeers  and six moneths; and again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth its fruit: but take heed in your prayers, least that you should desire some vain thing, or that which is against the will of God; for God would have all things good: neither shalt thou use the name of thy God in vain, for he shall not go unpunished, who taketh his name for a vain thing: be abstemious and give alms, for the Angel saith to Tobiah, prayer is good with fasting and alms; and we read in the book of Judith: Know ye, that the Lord will hear your prayers, if ye shall persevere in fastings and prayers in his sight.
These are the things, which for an introduction into Magick we have collected out of the tradition of the ancients, and diversly compiled in this book, in short words, yet sufficient for those who are intelligent; some of these things are written in order, some without order, some things are delivered by fragments, some things are even hid, and left for the search of the intelligent, who more acutely contemplating these things which are written, and diligently searching, may obtain the compleat rudiments of the magicall Art, and also infallible experiments: for we have delivered this Art in such a manner, that it may not be hid from the prudent and intelligent, and yet may not admit wicked and incredulous men to the mysteries of these secrets, but leave them destitute and astonished, in the shade of ignorance and desperation: You therefore sons of wisdom and learning, search diligently in this book, gathering together our dispersed intentions, which in divers places we have propounded, and what is hid in one place, we make manifest in another, that it may appear to you wise men; for, for you only have we written, whose mind is not corrupted, but regulated according to the right order of living, who in chastity, and honesty, and in sound faith fear and reverence God: whose hands are free from sin and wickedness, whose manners are gentle, sober, and modest, you only shall find out this knowledge which is preserved for you, and the secrets which are hid by many Enigmaes cannot be perceived but by a profound intellect, which when you shall obtain, the whole science of the invincible magicall discipline will insinuate it self into you: and those vertues will appear to you, which in times past Hermes, Zoroastes, Apollonius, and the others, who wrought miracles, obtained. But ye, envious, caluminators, sons of base ignorance, and foolish lewdnest, come not nigh our writings, for they are your enemies, and stand on a precipice, that ye may erre and fall head-long into misery: if any therefore through his incredulity or dulness of intellect, doth not obtain his desire, let him not impute the fault of his igorance to me, or say that I have erred, or purposely written falsly and lied, but let him accuse himself, who understandeth not our writings; for they are obscure, and covered with divers mysteries, by the which it will easily happen, that many my erre and lose their sense; therefore let no man be angry with me, if we have folded up the truth of this science with many Enigmaes, and dispersed it in divers places, for we have not hidden it from the wise, but from the wicked and ungodly, and have delivered it in such words which necessarily blind the foolish, and easily may admit the wise to the understanding of them.
This place doth require that we speak of Magick; for it is so neer joyned to, and of affinity with Astrologie, in so much that be that professeth Magick without Astrologie, doth nothing, but altogether is in an errour. Suidas is of the opinion that Magick had its name, and originall from the Maguseans. It is the common opinion, that it is a Persian name, to which Porphyry, and Apuleius assent, and that in that tongue it signifies a priest, wise man, or Philosopher. Magick therefore comprehending all Philosophy, naturall, and Mathematicall, joyns the powers of Religions to them. Hence also they contain in them Goetia, and Theurgia, for which cause many divide Magick into two parts, viz Naturall, and Ceremoniall.
It is thought that naturall Magic is nothing else but the highest power of naturall Sciences, which therefore is called the height of naturall Philosophy, and the most absolute consummation thereof, and that which is the active part of naturall Philosophy, which by the help of naturall vertues, from a mutuall, and opportune application of them, brings forth operations even to Admiration: which Magick the Aethiopians, and Indians especially did use, where the vertue of herbs, and stones, and other things looking towards it was sufficient. It is said that Hierome made mention of it to Paulinus, where he saith that Apollonius the Tyanean was a Magician, or Philosopher, as also the Pythagorians; of this kind were those wise men which came to worship Christ with gifts when he was born, which the interpreters of the Chaldeans  expound the Philosophers of the Chaldeans, such as were Hiarchas amongst the Bragmanne, Tespion amongst the Gymnosophists, Budda  amongst the Babylonians, Numa Pompilius amongst the Romans, Zamolxides amongst the Thracians, Abbaris amongst the Hyperboreans, Hermes amongst the Ægyptians, Zoroastes  the son of Oromasus  amongst the Persians. For the Indians, Æthiopians, Chaldeans, and Persians chiefly did excell in this Magick. With which therefore (as Plato relates in Alcibiades) the sons of the Persian Kings were instructed, that they might learn to administer, and distribute their image to the common wealth of the world, and the common wealth to it: and Cicero saith in his books of divination, that there was none amongst the Persians did enjoy the Kingdom, but he that first had learned Magick. Naturall Magick therefore is that which contemplates the powers of all naturall and celestiall things, and searching curiously into their Sympathy, doth produce occult powers in nature into publique  view, so coupling inferior things as allurements to the gifts of superiour things, that by their mutuall application, that from thence arise wonderfull miracles, not so much by art as by nature, to which art becomes an assistant whilest it works these things. For Magicians, as the most curious searchers of nature, making use of those things which are prepared by nature, by applying active things to passive, produce oftentimes effects before the time ordained by nature, which the vulgar think are miracles, which indeed are naturall works, the prevention of the time only coming betwixt: as if any one should produce Roses in the moneth  of March, and ripe Grapes, or sowed Beans, or make Parsly  to grow into a perfect plant within few hours, nay, and cause greater things, as clouds, rains, thunders, and animals of divers kinds, and very many transmutions of things, many of which sort Roger Racon boasted that he did do by meer  naturall Magick. Of the works thereof wrote Zoroastes, Hermes, Eranthes King of Arabia, Zacharias the Babylonian, Joseph the Hebrew, Bocus, Aaron, Zenotenus, Kiramides, Almadal, Thetel, Alchindus, Abel, Ptolomy, Geber, Zahel, Nazabarub, Thebith, Berith, Solomon, Astaphon, Hipparchus, Alcmeon, Apollonius, Triphon, and many others, many of whose works are yet entire, and many fragments are yet extant, and have come into my hands. Some modern men have also wrote of naturall Magick, but they but a few things, as Albertus, Arnoldus de villa nova, Raimundus Lullie, Bacon, and Apponus,  and the Author of the book to Alfonsus, set forth under the name of Picatrix, who also together with naturall Magick, mixeth much superstition, which indeed the rest have done.
There are moreover other most witty emulators of nature and most bold inquisitors, which promise they can by the influences of the heavens, obtained without naturall vertues, but only by Mathematicall learming, produce works like to those of nature, as walking, or talking bodies, which have not animall vertues: such was the wooden dove of Archita, which did flie, and the statue of Mercury which did speak; and the brazen head made by Albertus Magnus, which they say did speak. Boetius a man of a great wit and much learning, excelled in these things, to whom Cassiodorus writing concerning such like things, saith, to thee it is appointed to know hard things, and shew miracles: by the ingenuity of thy art metals speak, Diomedes in brass trumpets, the brazen Serpent hisseth, birds are feigned, and those which know no proper sound, are heard sending forth sweet melody, we relate small things of him, who hath power to imitate the heavens; concerning these arts I think that is spoken which we read in Plato in the eleventh book of Laws. There is an art given to mortall men, by which they should generate certain latter things, not partaking of truth or divinity, but should deduce certain representations of affinity with them: and thus far have Magicians gone, being men most bold to do all things, especially that old strong Serpent, the promiser of all Sciences favoring them, that they like apes endeavour to emulate God, and nature.
There is moreover a kind of naturall Magick, which they call bewitching, medicinary, which is done by cups, love-potions, and divers medicaments of Sorcerers: Of which sort Democritus is said to make some, whereby good, happy, and fortunate sons may be begotten: and another whereby we may rightly understand the voyces  of birds, as Philostratus and Porphyrie  relate of Apollonius. Virgil also speaking of certain Pontick herbs, saith,
And Pliny relates that a certain man, Demarchus Parrhasitus, in a sacrifice which the Arcades made by a humane sacrifice to Jupiter Lyceus, tasted of the entrals  of a boy that was sacrificed, and turned himself into a wolfe, by reason of which changing of men into a wolf, Austin  thinks that the name was put upon Pan Lyceus, and Jupiter Lyceus. The same Austin relates, that whilest he was in Italy, there were certain women Magicians like Circe, who by giving cheese to travellers turned them into cattle; and when they had carried what burdens they pleased, restored them into men again; and that the same happened to a certain Father called Prestantine. But least any one should think these things to be but foolish toyes, and things impossible, let him call to mind what Scripture mentions concerning Nebuchadnezar  the King, how he was turned into an ox, and lived seven yeers with hay, and at length returned through the mercy of God into a man again, whose body after his death, his son Evilmerodac gave as a prey to the Vulters, least he should again rise from the dead, who returned from a beast into a man: and more of this kind doth Exodus relate of the Magicians of Pharaoh. But Solomon speaks of the same, whether Magicians, or Sorcerers, when he saith, Thou hast terrified them O God! because they have done horrible deeds by inchantments. Moreover, this I would have you know, that these Magicians do not search into naturall things only, but also those things which do accompany nature, and after a manner put it off, as motions, numbers, figures, sounds, voyces, concents, lights, affections of the mind, & words. So the Psylli, and Marsi called together serpents, and others by other things depressing them, put them to flight. So Orpheus repressed the tempest of the Argonaute with a hymn; and Homer relates of Ulysses that his blood was restrained with words. And in the law of the twelve tables punishment was ordained for them who enchanted the corn: that without all doubt the Magicians did produce wonderfull effects by words only, affections, and such like, not upon themselves, but also upon extraneous things; all which things are thought to put forth their innate vertue upon other things, draw them to them, or expell them from them, or any otherwise affecting of them, no otherwise then the Loadstone draws Iron, or Jeat Chaff, or a Diamond or Garlick bind them, so that by this graduall, and concatenated Sympathy of things, not only naturall, and celestiall gifts, but also intellectuall, and divine may, as Iamblicus, Proclus, and Synesius confirm by the opinion of Magicians, be received from above, which Proclus in his book of sacrifice, and Magick confesseth, viz: That by the consent of these kinds of things, the Magicians were wont to call up the dieties  themselves. To such a height of madness some of them are grown, that from divers constellations of the Stars, through intervals of times, and a certain rule of proportions being observed, think that an image of the gods can with a beck receive the spirit of life, and intellect, and so give an answer to them that ask counsell of it, and reveal the secrets of occult truth. Hence it is manifest that this naturall Magick is sometimes inclining to Goetia, and Theurgia, entangled in the wyles and errours of evill Spirits.
Now the parts of Ceremonial Magick are Goetia and Theurgia, Goetia is unfortunate, by the commerces of unclean spirits made up of the rites of wicked curiosities, unlawfull charms, and deprecations, and is abandoned and execrated by all laws. Of this kinde are those which we now adayes call Necromancers, and Witches.
These therefore are they which call upon the souls of the dead, and those which the Ancients called Epodi, who enchant boys, and bring them out into the speech of the Oracle, and which carry about them familiar spirits, as we read of Socrates and such, as it is said, they fed in glasses, by which they feign themselves to prophesy. And all these proceed two waies. For some endeavour to call and compell evill spirits, adjuring by a certain power, especially of divine names, for seeing every creature fears, and reverenceth the name of him who made it, no marvel, if Goetians, Infidels, Pagans, Jews, Saracens, and men of every prophane sect and society do bind Divels  by invocating the divine name. Now there are some that are most impiously wicked indeed, that submit themselves to Divels, sacrifice to, and adore them, and thereby become guilty of Idolatry, and the basest abasement: to which crimes if the former are not obnoxious, yet they expose themselves to manifest dangers. For even compelled divels  alwaies deceive us whithersoever we go. Now from the sect of the Goetians have proceeded all those books of darkness, which Vulpianus the Lawyer calls books disallowed to be read, and forthwith appointed them to be destroyed, of which sort the first is Zabulus reported to invent, who was given to unlawfull arts, then Barnabas a certain Cyprian; and now in these dayes there are carryed about books with feigned titles, under the names of Adam, Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Solomon, also Paul, Honorius, Cyprianus, Albertus, Thomas, Hierome, and of a certain man of Yorke, whose toies  Alphonsus King of Castile, Robert an English man, Bacon, and Apponus, and many other men of a deplored wit have foolishly followed. Moreover they have not made men only and Saints, and Patriarkes, and the angels of God, the authors of such execrable opinions, but they boast also that those books were dilivered by Raziel, and Raphael the Angels of Adam and Tobias; Which books openly betray themselves to him that looks narrowly  into them, to be a rule, rite, and custome of their precepts, and a kind of words, and characters, an order of extruction, an empty phrase, and to contain nothing but meer toyes, and impostures, and to be made in latter times by men ignorant of all ancient Magick, and forlorn artists of pernitious  art, of prophane observations mixed with the ceremonies of our religion, with many unknown names, and seals intermixed, that thereby they may terrifie and astonish the simple, and ignorant. Moreover it doth not yet appear that these arts are fables: for unless there were such indeed, and by them many wonderfull and hurtfull things done, there would not be such strict divine, and humane lawes made concerning them, for the utter exterminating of them. And why do the Goetians use those evill spirits only, but because good Angels will hardly appear, expecting the command of God, and come not but to men pure in heart, and holy in life: but the evill are easily called up, favouring him that is false, and counterfeiting holiness are alwaies ready to deceive with their craft, that they may be worshipped, and adored: and because women are rnost desirous of secrets, and less cautious, and prone to superstition, they are the more easily deceived, and therefore give up themselves the more readily to them, and do great prodigies. The poets sing of Circe, Medea, and others of this sort; Cicero, Pliny, Seneca, Austin, and many others as well Philosophers as Catholike  Doctors, and Historians, also the Scriptures, testifie the like. For in the books of the Kings we read, that a woman who lived at Endor, called up the soul of Samuel the Prophet, although many interpret it not to be the soul of the Prophet, but an evil spirit, which took upon him his shape. Yet the Hebrew masters say that Austin to Simplicianus doth not deny but it might be the true spirit of Samuel, which might easily be called up fom its body before a compleat year after his departure, as also the Goetians teach. Also Magician Necromancers suppose that might be done by certain natural powers and bonds, as we have said in our books of Occult Philosophy. Therefore the ancient Fathers, skilfull of spiritual things, did not without cause ordain that the bodies of the dead should he buried in a holy place, and be accompanied with lights, and sprinkled with holy water, and be perfumed with fiankincense, and incense, and be expiated by prayers as long as they continued above ground. For as the Masters of the Hebrews say, All our body and carnal Animal, and whatsoever in us depends upon the matter of the flesh, being ill disposed, is left for meat to the Serpent, and as they called it, to Azazel, who is the Lord of the flesh and blood, and the Prince of this world, and is called in Leviticus the Prince of deserts, to whom it is said in Genesis, Thou shalt eat dust all the daies of thy life. And in Isaiah, Dust thy bread, i.e. our body created of the dust of the earth, so long as it shall not be sanctified, and turned into better, that it be no longer an effect of the serpent, but of God, viz a spiritual made of carnal, according to the word of Paul, saying, that which is sowed a carnal, shall arise a spiritual; and els where, All indeed shall rise up, but shall not be changed, because many shall remain forever as meat of the Serpent. This filthy and horrid matter of the flesh and meat of the Serpent we therefore cast off by death, changing it for a better and spirituall, which shall be in the resurrection of the dead; and is already done in those, who have tasted of the first fruits of the resurrection, and many have already attained to, by the vertue of the divine spirit, in this life, as Enoch, Eliah and Moses, whose bodies were changed into a spirituall nature, and have not seen corrupted; neither are their carkasses  left to the power of the Serpent. And this was that dispute of the devill with Michael the Archangel, concerning the body of Moses, of which Jude makes mention in his Epistle. But of Goetia, and Necromancy let this suffice.
Now many think that Theurgia is not unlawfull, as if this be governed by good Angels, and a divine diety, when as yet oftentimes it is under the names of God, and the fallacies of evil Angels obstringed by the wicked fallacies of the devils. For we do procure, and attract not by naturall powers only, but also by certaln rites, and ceremonies, celestials, and by them divine vertues to our selves; Of which together with many rules the ancient Magicians did treat in many volumes. But the greatest part of all ceremonies consists in observing cleanness, and purity, first of the mind, then of the body, and of those things which are about the body, as in the skin, in garments, in habitations, in vessels, utensils, oblations, sacrifices, the purity of which disposeth to the acquaintance with and beholding of divine things, and is very much required in sacred things, according to the word of Isaiah, Be ye washed, and made clean, and take away the evil of your thoughts. Now impurity, because it oftentimes infects the air, and man, disturbes that most pure influence of Celestiall and divine things, and chaseth away the pure spirits of God. But sometimes impure spirits, and deceiving powers, that they be worshipped, and adored for gods, require also this purity. Therefore here is great need of caution, as we have lately discoursed at large in our books of Occult Philosophy. But of this Theurgia, or Magick of divine things Porphyrie  disputing at large, at length concludes that by Theurgicall consecrations the soul of man may be fitted to receive spirits, and Angels, and to see God; but he altogether denies that we can by this art return to God. Of his School therefore is the Art Almadel, the Notary art, the Pauline Art, the art of Revelations, and many such like superstitions, which are so much the more pernicious, by how much they seem the more divine to the ignorant.
Here the words of Pliny come into my mind, who saith the faction of Magick depends upon Moses and Lutopea, being Jews; which words put me in mind of the Cabalie of the Jews, which the Hebrews are of opinion was delivered to Moses by God himself on mount Sinai, and then by degrees of succession without the monuments of letters was untill the times of Esdra delivered to others by word of mouth only: as the Pythagorian opinions were formerly delivered by Archippus, and Lysiaus, who had Schools at Thebes in Greece, in which the Scholers  keeping the precepts of their masters in their memorie, did use their wit, and memorie instead of books: So certain Jews despising literature, placed this in memorie, and observations, and vocall traditions, whence Cabalie was by the Hebrews called as it were the reception of any thing from another only by hearing. That art (as it is reported) is very ancient, but the name was known but of late times amongst Christians: They deliver a double science therefore, the one of Bresith, which they call Cosmologie, viz: explaining the powers of things created, naturall, and Celestiall, and expounding the secrets of the Law and Bible by Philosophicall reasons: which truly upon this account differs nothing at all from naturall Magick, in which we believe K. Solomon excelled. For it is read in the sacred Histories of the Hebrews, that he was skilled in all things, even from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hyssop that grows upon the wal: also in cattle, birds, creeping things, and fishes; all which shew that he knew the Magicall vertues of nature. Moses the Ægyptian, amongst the later writers followed after this in his exposition upon the Pentacles; also many more Talmudists. They call the other Science thereof of Mercara, which is concerning the more sublime contemplations of divine & Angelick vertues, & of sacred names, and seals, being a certain Symbolical divinity, in which letters, numbers, figures, things, & names, and tops of elements, and lines, points, and accents, are all significative of most profound things, & great secrets. This again they divide into Arithmancy, viz that which is called Notariacon, treating of Angelical vertues, names, & seals, also of the conditions of spirits, and souls; and into Theomancy, which searcheth into the mysteries of divine majesty, as the emanations thereof, & sacred names, and Pentacles, which he that knows may excell with wonderful vertues; as that when he pleaseth, he may fore-know all future things, & command whole nature, have power over devils, and Angels, and do miracles. By this they suppose, that Moses did shew so many signs, and turned the rod into a Serpent, and the waters into blood, and that he sent Frogs, Flies, Lice, Locusts, Caterpillars, fire with hail, botches and boyls  on the Egyptians; and slew every first born of man and beast; and that he opened the Seas, and carryed his thorow, and brought forth fountains out of the rock, and quails from Heaven, that he sent before his, clouds and lightnings by day, a pillar of fire by night, and called down from Heaven the voice of the living God to the people, and did strike the haughty with fire, and those that murmured with the Leprosie; and on the ill deserving brought suddain destruction; the earth gaping and swallowing them up; further he fed the people with heavenly food; pacified Serpents, cured the envenomed, preserved the numerous multitude from infirmity, & their garments from wearing out, & made them victors over their enemies. To conclude, by this art of miracles Joshua commanded the Sun to stand still, Eliah called down fire from Heaven upon his enemies, restored a dead childe to life; Daniel stopt the mouths of the Lyons; The three children sang songs in the fiery Oven; moreover by this art the incredulous Jews affirm, that even Christ did do so many miracles; Solomon also very well knew this art, and delivered charms against devils, and their bonds, and the manner of conjurations, and against diseases, as Joseph reporteth, but as I doubt not but that God revealed to Moses many secrets, contained under the bark of the words of the Law, which were not to be revealed to the prophane vulgar. So I acknowledge that this Cabalisticall art, which the Hebrews brag of, and I sometimes diligently and laboriously sought after, is nothing else then a meer rhapsody of superstition, and a certain Theurgicall Magick: but if it proceeded from God (as the Jews boast) and conduceth to the perfection of life, health of men, to the worship of God, and to the truth of understanding; truly that spirit of truth, which hath left this Synagogue, and come to teach us all truth, would not have concealed it from his Church even untill these last times, which indeed knoweth all things that are of God, whose benediction, baptism, and other mysteries of salvation are revealed and perfected in every tongue, for every tongue hath the same equall power, if so be that there be the same equall piety, neither is there any name, either in heaven or earth, by the which we must be saved, and by which we work miracles, besides this one name Jesus, in which all things are recapitulated and contained. Hence it is, that the Jews, who are most skilful in using the names of God, can operate little or nothing after Christ, as their ancient fathers did; but that we by experience find, and see, that by the revolution of this art (as they call them) oftentimes wonderful sentences, full of great mysteries, are wrested from the holy Scriptures, this is nothing else then a certain playing upon Allegories, which idle men busymg themselves with all the points, letters, and numbers, which this tongue and the custome of writing do easily suffer, do fain and disguise at their pleasures; which although sometimes they hold forth great mysteries, yet they can neither prove nor evince any thing; but we may (according to the words of Gregory) with the same facility contemn them, as they are affirmed. Rabanus the Monk, by the same artifice hath feigned many things, but in Latin Characters and verses, with certain pictures inserted, which being read any way by the delineations of the superficies and pictures, do declare some sacred mysterie, representing the histories of the things painted; which also may without doubt be wrested from prophane writings, as every one may know, who hath read the Cantones of Valena Proba, composed out of the verses of Virgil, concerning Christ; All things of this kind are the speculations of idle brains, but what belongeth to the working of miracles, there is none of you, I suppose, of so foolish an understanding, who believeth that they have any art or science of them; therefore this Cabala of the Jews is nothing else then a most pernicious superstition, by the which they gather at their pleasure, divide, transfer words, names and letters, scatteringly put in the holy Scriptures, and by making one thing out of another, they dissolve the connections of the truth, the speeches, inductions and parables, and here and there construing them by their own fictions, would bring the words of God to their follies, defaming the Scriptures, and saying that their fictions have foundation on them. They calumniate the Law of God, and by the supputations of words, syllables, letters, numbers impudently extorted, they assay to bring violent and blasphemous proofs for their unbelief. Besides, they being puft up by these trifles, do boast that they finde and search out the unspeakable mysteries of God, and secrets, which are ahove the Scriptures, by the which also they irnpudently affirm, and without blushing, that they can even prophecy, and do miracles and wonders; but it happeneth to them, as to Aesops Dog, who leaving his bread, and gaping after the shadow, lost his food; so this perfidious and stiff necked people, being always busied in the shadows of the Scriptures, and about their own vanities, and doing violence by their artificiall, but superstitious Cabala, do loose the bread of eternall life, and being fed with vain words, do destroy the word of truth; from this Judaicall ferment of Cabalisticall superstition proceeded (as I suppose) the Ophitane, Gnostican, and Valentinian Hereticks, who together with their disciples, feigned a certain Greek Cabala, perverting all the mysteries of the Christian faith, and by their heretical corruption wresting them to the Greek letters and numbers, by the which they constituted a body of truth (as they call it) and taught, that without these mysteries of letters & numbers the truth could not be found in the Gospel, because that the writings thereof are various, and sometimes repugnant to themselves, and full of parables; that they who see, might not see, and that they who hear, might not hear, and that they who understand, might not understand, and that they are propounded to the blind and erroneous, according to the capacity of their blindness and error; But that the sincere truth lying hid under these things, is committed to the perfect only, not by writings, but by word of mouth, and that this is that Alphabetary and Arithmatical Theology which Christ in private manifested to his Apostles; and which Paul speaketh to the perfect only; for seeing that these are the highest mysteries, therefore they are not written, nor ought so to be, but to be kept in secret amongst wise men; but no man is a wise man amongst them, who knoweth not to refrain the greatest monsters of Heresie.
But let us return to that Magick, part of which is an art of jugglings (i.e.) delusions, which are made according to appearance only, by which Magicians shew phantasmes, and play many miracles by circulatory frauds, and cause dreams, which they do not so much by Geotick inchantments, and imprecations, and deceits of devils, as by certain vapors, perfumes, lights, love-medicines, collyries, alligations, and suspensions, also by rings, images, glasses, and such like drugs, and instruments of Magicall art, and a naturall and Celestiall power. Also many things are done daily by sleight  of hand, of which sort we see some are done daily by stage players, and sporters which we call Chirosophers (i.e.) skilful in sleight of hand. There are extant concerning this art, books of the Legerdemain of Hermes, and some others. We read also of a certain man called Paseton, a most notable juglar, that was wont to shew a banquet to guests, and when he pleased, to make it vanish away again, all rising with hunger, and thirst, being deluded. We read that Numa Pompilius did use these kinds of jugglings, and also that most learned Pythagoras did sometimes do this toy, that what things he pleased, he would write in a glass, which being set against the full Moon, he would shew to any one that stood behind it, those things represented in the Globe of the Moon; Hither belongs whatooever Poets sing of the transmutations of men, which also is delivered by Historians, and by some Christian Divines, and also is recorded in the Scripture. So men may appear like Asses, or horses, or other Animals with fascinated eyes, or a troubled medium, and that by a naturall art. Sometimes these are done by good and evil spirits, or by God himself at the request of some good men, as in the Scripture we read of Elisha the Prophet beset by an Army of the King fortifying Dotham. But to pure eyes, and such as be opened by God, those cannot deceive; so that woman which was judged to be a kind of cattle, did seem to Hilario to be not any such thing, but a woman. These things therefore which are done according to appearance only, are called jugglers.
But those things which are done by the Art of transmuting, or translating, as of Nebuchadnezar, or of Corn carryed to another field, we have spoke of before; but of this art of juggling, thus saith Iamblicus, These things which are supposed to be juggled or bewitched, besides imagination, have no truth of action or essence. The end of these is but to hold forth things to the imagination according to appearance, of which there presently remains no footsteps or signs. Now by what hath been said, it is manifest that Magick is nothing else but a collection of Idolatry, Astrology, and superstitious medicines; And now there is by Magicians raised a great company of hereticks in the Church, who as Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses, do in the like manner resist the Apostolicall truth. The chief of these was Simon the Samaritan, on whom by reason of this art was bestowed at Rome in Claudius Caesars time, a Statue, with this Inscription, To Simon the holy God. Of his blasphemies Clemens Eusebius, and Irenaeus make mention. From this Simon, as from a Seminary of all Heresies proceeded by successions the monstrous Ophites, the filthy Gnosticks, the impious Valentinians, Cerdonians, Marcionists, Montanians, and many other Hereticks, lying against God for gain and vain glory, doing no good to men, but deceiving them, and drawing them into destruction and error, to whom they that give credit shall be confounded in the judgement of God. But of Magick I wrote whilest I was very yong  three large books, which I called Of Occult Philosophy, in which what was then through the curiosity of my youth erroneous, I now being more advised, am willing to have retracted, by this recantation; I formerly spent much time and costs in these vanities. At last I grew so wise as to be able to disswade others from this destruction; For whosoever do not in the truth, nor in the power of God, but in the deceits of divels, according to the operation of wicked spirits presume to divine and prophesy, and practising through Magicall vanities, exorcismss, incantions and other demoniacall works and deceits of Idolatry, boasting of delusions, and phantasmes presently ceasing, brag that they can do miracles, I say all these shall with Jannes, and Jambres, and Simon Magus, be destinated to the torments of eternall Fire.
